The Devil’s Heir
Honore de Balzac
There once was a good old canon of Notre Dame de Paris, who lived in a
fine house of his own, near St. Pierre-aux-Boeufs, in the Parvis. This
canon had come a simple priest to Paris, naked as a dagger without its
sheath. But since he was found to be a handsome man, well furnished
with everything, and so well constituted, that if necessary he was able to
do the work of many, without doing himself much harm, he gave himself
up earnestly to the confessing of ladies, giving to the melancholy a gentle
absolution, to the sick a drachm of his balm, to all some little dainty. He
was so well known for his discretion, his benevolence, and other
ecclesiastical qualities, that he had customers at Court. Then in order not
to awaken the jealousy of the officials, that of the husbands and others,
in short, to endow with sanctity these good and profitable practices, the
Lady Desquerdes gave him a bone of St. Victor, by virtue of which all the
miracles were performed. And to the curious it was said, "He has a bone
which will cure everything;" and to this, no one found anything to reply,
because it was not seemly to suspect relics. Beneath the shade of his
cassock, the good priest had the best of reputations, that of a man valiant
under arms. So he lived like a king. He made money with holy water;
sprinkled it and transmitted the holy water into good wine. More than
that, his name lay snugly in all the et ceteras of the notaries, in wills or in
caudicils, which certain people have falsely written CODICIL, seeing that
the word is derived from cauda, as if to say the tail of the legacy. In fact,
the good old Long Skirts would have been made an archbishop if he had
only said in joke, "I should like to put on a mitre for a handkerchief in
order to have my head warmer." Of all the benefices offered to him, he
chose only a simple canon's stall to keep the good profits of the
confessional. But one day the courageous canon found himself weak in
the back, seeing that he was all sixty- eight years old, and had held many
confessionals. Then thinking over all his good works, he thought it about
time to cease his apostolic labours, the more so, as he possessed about
one hundred thousand crowns earned by the sweat of his body. From that
day he only confessed ladies of high lineage, and did it very well. So that
it was said at Court that in spite of the efforts of the best young clerks 
there was still no one but the Canon of St. Pierre-aux-Boeufs to properly
bleach the soul of a lady of condition. Then at length the canon became
by force of nature a fine nonagenarian, snowy about the head, with
trembling hands, but square as a tower, having spat so much without
coughing, that he coughed now without being able to spit; no longer
rising from his chair, he who had so often risen for humanity; but drinking
dry, eating heartily, saying nothing, but having all the appearance of a
living Canon of Notre Dame. Seeing the immobility of the aforesaid
canon; seeing the stories of his evil life which for some time had
circulated among the common people, always ignorant; seeing his dumb
seclusion, his flourishing health, his young old age, and other things too
numerous to mention--there were certain people who to do the
marvellous and injure our holy religion, went about saying that the true
canon was long since dead, and that for more than fifty years the devil
had taken possession of the old priest's body. In fact, it seemed to his
former customers that the devil could only by his great heat have
furnished these hermetic distillations, that they remembered to have
obtained on demand from this good confessor, who always had le diable
au corps. But as this devil had been undoubtedly cooked and ruined by
them, and that for a queen of twenty years he would not have moved,
well-disposed people and those not wanting in sense, or the citizens who
argued about everything, people who found lice in bald heads, demanded
why the devil rested under the form of a canon, went to the Church of
Notre Dame at the hours when the canons usually go, and ventured so far
as to sniff the perfume of the incense, taste the holy water, and a
thousand other things. To these heretical propositions some said that
doubtless the devil wished to convert himself, and others that he
remained in the shape of the canon to mock at the three nephews and
heirs of this said brave confessor and make them wait until the day of
their own death for the ample succession of this uncle, to whom they paid
great attention every day, going to look if the good man had his eyes
open, and in fact found him always with his eye clear, bright, and piercing
as the eye of a basilisk, which pleased them greatly, since they loved
their uncle very much--in words. On this subject an old woman related
that for certain the canon was the devil, because his two nephews, the
procureur and the captain, conducting their uncle at night, without a
lamp, or lantern, returning from a supper at the penitentiary's, had
caused him by accident to tumble over a heap of stones gathered 
together to raise the statue of St. Christopher. At first the old man had
struck fire in falling, but was, amid the cries of his dear nephews and by
the light of the torches they came to seek at her house found standing up
as straight as a skittle and as gay as a weaving whirl, exclaiming that the
good wine of the penitentiary had given him the courage to sustain this
shock and that his bones were exceedingly hard and had sustained rude
assaults. The good nephews believing him dead, were much astonished,
and perceived that the day that was to dispatch their uncle was a long
way off, seeing that at the business stones were of no use. So that they
did not falsely call him their good uncle, seeing that he was of good
quality. Certain scandalmongers said that the canon found so many
stones in his path that he stayed at home not to be ill with the stone, and
the fear of worse was the cause of his seclusion.
Of all these sayings and rumours, it remains that the old canon, devil or
not, kept his house, and refused to die, and had three heirs with whom he
lived as with his sciaticas, lumbagos, and other appendage of human life.
Of the said three heirs, one was the wickedest soldier ever born of a
woman, and he must have considerably hurt her in breaking his egg,
since he was born with teeth and bristles. So that he ate, two-fold, for the
present and the future, keeping wenches whose cost he paid; inheriting
from his uncle the continuance, strength, and good use of that which is
often of service. In great battles, he endeavoured always to give blows
without receiving them, which is, and always will be, the only problem to
solve in war, but he never spared himself there, and, in fact, as he had no
other virtue except his bravery, he was captain of a company of lancers,
and much esteemed by the Duke of Burgoyne, who never troubled what
his soldiers did elsewhere. This nephew of the devil was named Captain
Cochegrue; and his creditors, the blockheads, citizens, and others, whose
pockets he slit, called him the Mau-cinge, since he was as mischievous as
strong; but he had moreover his back spoilt by the natural infirmity of a
hump, and it would have been unwise to attempt to mount thereon to get
a good view, for he would incontestably have run you through.
The second had studied the laws, and through the favour of his uncle had
become a procureur, and practised at the palace, where he did the
business of the ladies, whom formerly the canon had the best confessed.
This one was called Pille-grue, to banter him upon his real name, which 
was Cochegrue, like that of his brother the captain. Pille-grue had a lean
body, seemed to throw off very cold water, was pale of face, and
possessed a physiognomy like a polecat.
This notwithstanding, he was worth many a penny more than the captain,
and had for his uncle a little affection, but since about two years his heart
had cracked a little, and drop by drop his gratitude had run out, in such a
way that from time to time, when the air was damp, he liked to put his
feet into his uncle's hose, and press in advance the juice of this good
inheritance. He and his brother, the soldier found their share very small,
since loyally, in law, in fact, in justice, in nature, and in reality, it was
necessary to give the third part of everything to a poor cousin, son of
another sister of the canon, the which heir, but little loved by the good
man, remained in the country, where he was a shepherd, near
Nanterre.__
The guardian of beasts, an ordinary peasant, came to town by the advice
of his two cousins, who placed him in their uncle's house, in the hope
that, as much by his silly tricks and his clumsiness, his want of brain, and
his ignorance, he would be displeasing to the canon, who would kick him
out of his will. Now this poor Chiquon, as the shepherd was named, had
lived about a month alone with his old uncle, and finding more profit or
more amusement in minding an abbot than looking after sheep, made
himself the canon's dog, his servant, the staff of his old age, saying, "God
keep you," when he passed wind, "God save you," when he sneezed, and
"God guard you," when he belched; going to see if it rained, where the
cat was, remaining silent, listening, speaking, receiving the coughs of the
old man in his face, admiring him as the finest canon there ever was in
the world, all heartily and in good faith, knowing that he was licking him
after the manner of animals who clean their young ones; and the uncle,
who stood in no need of learning which side the bread was buttered,
repulsed poor Chiquon, making him turn about like a die, always calling
him Chiquon, and always saying to his other nephews that this Chiquon
was helping to kill him, such a numskull was he. Thereupon, hearing this,
Chiquon determined to do well by his uncle, and puzzled his
understanding to appear better; but as he had a behind shaped like a pair
of pumpkins, was broad shouldered, large limbed, and far from sharp, he
more resembled old Silenus than a gentle Zephyr. In fact, the poor 
shepherd, a simple man, could not reform himself, so he remained big
and fat, awaiting his inheritance to make himself thin.
One evening the canon began discoursing concerning the the devil and
the grave agonies, penances, tortures, etc., which God will get warm for
the accursed, and the good Chiquon hearing it, began to open his eyes as
wide as the door of an oven, at the statement, without believing a word of
it.
"What," said the canon, "are you not a Christian?"
"In that, yes," answered Chiquon.
"Well, there is a paradise for the good; is it not necessary to have a hell
for the wicked?"
"Yes, Mr. Canon; but the devil's of no use. If you had here a wicked man
who turned everything upside down; would you not kick him out of
doors?"
"Yes, Chiquon."
"Oh, well, mine uncle; God would be very stupid to leave in the this
world, which he has so curiously constructed, an abominable devil whose
special business it is to spoil everything for him. Pish! I recognise no devil
if there be a good God; you may depend upon that. I should very much
like to see the devil. Ha, ha! I am not afraid of his claws!"
"And if I were of your opinion I should have no care of my very youthful
years in which I held confessions at least ten times a day."
"Confess again, Mr. Canon. I assure you that will be a precious merit on
high."
"There, there! Do you mean it?"
"Yes, Mr. Canon."
"Thou dost not tremble, Chiquon, to deny the devil?"
"I trouble no more about it than a sheaf of corn."
"The doctrine will bring misfortune upon you."
"By no means. God will defend me from the devil because I believe him
more learned and less stupid than the savans make him out."
Thereupon the two other nephews entered, and perceiving from the voice
of the canon that he did not dislike Chiquon very much, and that the
jeremiads which he had made concerning him were simple tricks to
disguise the affection which he bore him, looked at each other in great
astonishment.
Then, seeing their uncle laughing, they said to him--
"If you will make a will, to whom will you leave the house?
"To Chiquon."
"And the quit rent of the Rue St. Denys?"
"To Chiquon."
"And the fief of Ville Parisis?"
"To Chiquon."
"But," said the captain, with his big voice, "everything then will be
Chiquon's."
"No," replied the canon, smiling, "because I shall have made my will in
proper form, the inheritance will be to the sharpest of you three; I am so
near to the future, that I can therein see clearly your destinies."
And the wily canon cast upon Chiquon a glance full of malice, like a decoy
bird would have thrown upon a little one to draw him into her net. The 
fire of his flaming eye enlightened the shepherd, who from that moment
had his understanding and his ears all unfogged, and his brain open, like
that of a maiden the day after her marriage. The procureur and the
captain, taking these sayings for gospel prophecies, made their bow and
went out from the house, quite perplexed at the absurd designs of the
canon.
"What do you think of Chiquon?" said Pille-grue to Mau-cinge.
"I think, I think," said the soldier, growling, "that I think of hiding myself
in the Rue d'Hierusalem, to put his head below his feet; he can pick it up
again if he likes."
"Oh, oh!" said the procureur, "you have a way of wounding that is easily
recognised, and people would say 'It's Cochegrue.' As for me, I thought to
invite him to dinner, after which, we would play at putting ourselves in a
sack in order to see, as they do at Court, who could walk best thus
attired. Then having sewn him up, we could throw him into the Seine, at
the same time begging him to swim."
"This must be well matured," replied the soldier.
"Oh! it's quite ripe," said the advocate. "The cousin gone to the devil, the
heritage would then be between us two."
"I'm quite agreeable," said the fighter, "but we must stick as close
together as the two legs of the same body, for if you are fine as silk, I as
strong as steel, and daggers are always as good as traps-- you hear that,
my good brother."
"Yes," said the advocate, "the cause is heard--now shall it be the thread
or the iron?"
"Eh? ventre de Dieu! is it then a king that we are going to settle? For a
simple numskull of a shepherd are so many words necessary? Come!
20,000 francs out of the Heritage to the one of us who shall first cut him
off: I'll say to him in good faith, 'Pick up your head.'"
"And I, 'Swim my friend,'" cried the advocate, laughing like the gap of a
pourpoint.
And then they went to supper, the captain to his wench, and the advocate
to the house of a jeweller's wife, of whom he was the lover.
Who was astonished? Chiquon! The poor shepherd heard the planning of
his death, although the two cousins had walked in the parvis, and talked
to each other as every one speaks at church when praying to God. So
that Chiquon was much coupled to know if the words had come up or if
his ears had gone down.
"Do you hear, Mister Canon?"
"Yes," said he, "I hear the wood crackling in the fire."
"Ho, ho!" replied Chiquon, "if I don't believe in the devil, I believe in St.
Michael, my guardian angel; I go there where he calls me."
"Go, my child," said the canon, "and take care not to wet yourself, nor to
get your head knocked off, for I think I hear more rain, and the beggars
in the street are not always the most dangerous beggars."
At these words Chiquon was much astonished, and stared at the canon;
found his manner gay, his eye sharp, and his feet crooked; but as he had
to arrange matters concerning the death which menaced him, he thought
to himself that he would always have leisure to admire the canon, or to
cut his nails, and he trotted off quickly through the town, as a little
woman trots towards her pleasure.
His two cousins having no presumption of the divinatory science, of which
shepherds have had many passing attacks, had often talked before him of
their secret goings on, counting him as nothing.
Now one evening, to amuse the canon, Pille-grue had recounted to him
how had fallen in love with him a wife of a jeweller on whose head he had
adjusted certain carved, burnished, sculptured, historical horns, fit for the
brow of a prince. The good lady was to hear him, a right merry wench, 
quick at opportunities, giving an embrace while her husband was
mounting the stairs, devouring the commodity as if she was swallowing a
a strawberry, only thinking of love-making, always trifling and frisky, gay
as an honest woman who lacks nothing, contenting her husband, who
cherished her so much as he loved his own gullet; subtle as a perfume, so
much so, that for five years she managed so well with his household
affairs, and her own love affairs, that she had the reputation of a prudent
woman, the confidence of her husband, the keys of the house, the purse,
and all.
"And when do you play upon this gentle flute?" said the canon.
"Every evening and sometimes I stay all the night."
"But how?" said the canon, astonished.
"This is how. There is a room close to, a chest into which I get. When the
good husband returns from his friend the draper's, where he goes to
supper every evening, because often he helps the draper's wife in her
work, my mistress pleads a slight illness, lets him go to bed alone, and
comes to doctor her malady in the room where the chest is. On the
morrow, when my jeweller is at his forge, I depart, and as the house has
one exit on to the bridge, and another into the street, I always come to
the door when the husband is not, on the pretext of speaking to him of
his suits, which commence joyfully and heartily, and I never let them
come to an end. It is an income from cuckoldom, seeing that in the minor
expenses and loyal costs of the proceedings, he spends as much as on
the horses in his stable. He loves me well, as all good cuckolds should
love the man who aids them, to plant, cultivate, water and dig the natural
garden of Venus, and he does nothing without me."__
Now these practices came back again to the memory of the shepherd,
who was illuminated by the light issuing from his danger, and counselled
by the intelligence of those measures of self-preservation, of which every
animal possesses a sufficient dose to go to the end of his ball of life. So
Chiquon gained with hasty feet the Rue de la Calandre, where the jeweller
should be supping with his companion, and after having knocked at the
door, replied to question put to him through the little grill, that he was a 
messenger on state secrets, and was admitted to the draper's house. Now
coming straight to the fact, he made the happy jeweller get up from his
table, led him to a corner, and said to him: "If one of your neighbours had
planted a horn on your forehead and he was delivered to you, bound hand
and foot, would you throw him into the river?"
"Rather," said the jeweller, "but if you are mocking me I'll give you a
good drubbing."
"There, there!" replied Chiquon, "I am one of your friends and come to
warn you that as many times as you have conversed with the draper's
wife here, as often has your own wife been served the same way by the
advocate Pille-grue, and if you will come back to your forge, you will find
a good fire there. On your arrival, he who looks after your you- knowwhat, to keep it in good order, gets into the big clothes chest. Now make
a pretence that I have bought the said chest of you, and I will be upon
the bridge with a cart, waiting your orders."
The said jeweller took his cloak and his hat, and parted company with his
crony without saying a word, and ran to his hole like a poisoned rat. He
arrives and knocks, the door is opened, he runs hastily up the stairs, finds
two covers laid, sees his wife coming out of the chamber of love, and then
says to her, "My dear, here are two covers laid."
"Well, my darling are we not two?"
"No," said he, "we are three."
"Is your friend coming?" said she, looking towards the stairs with perfect
innocence.
"No, I speak of the friend who is in the chest."
"What chest?" said she. "Are you in your sound senses? Where do you see
a chest? Is the usual to put friends in chests? Am I a woman to keep
chests full of friends? How long have friends been kept in chests? Are you
come home mad to mix up your friends with your chests? I know no other 
friend then Master Cornille the draper, and no other chest than the one
with our clothes in."
"Oh!," said the jeweller, "my good woman, there is a bad young man,
who has come to warn me that you allow yourself to be embraced by our
advocate, and that he is in the chest."
"I!" said she, "I would not put up with his knavery, he does everything
the wrong way."
"There, there, my dear," replied the jeweller, "I know you to be a good
woman, and won't have a squabble with you about this paltry chest. The
giver of the warning is a box-maker, to whom I am about to sell this
cursed chest that I wish never again to see in my house, and for this one
he will sell me two pretty little ones, in which there will not be space
enough even for a child; thus the scandal and the babble of those envious
of your virtue will be extinguished for want of nourishment."
"You give me great pleasure," said she; "I don't attach any value to my
chest, and by chance there is nothing in it. Our linen is at the wash. It will
be easy to have the mischievous chest taken away tomorrow morning.
Will you sup?"
"Not at all," said he, "I shall sup with a better appetite without the chest."
"I see," said she, "that you won't easily get the chest out of your head."
"Halloa, there!" said the jeweller to his smiths and apprentices; "come
down!"
In the twinkling of an eye his people were before him. Then he, their
master, having briefly ordered the handling of the said chest, this piece of
furniture dedicated to love was tumbled across the room, but in passing
the advocate, finding his feet in the air to the which he was not
accustomed, tumbled over a little.
"Go on," said the wife, "go on, it's the lid shaking."
"No, my dear, it's the bolt."
And without any other opposition the chest slid gently down the stairs.
"Ho there, carrier!" said the jeweller, and Chiquon came whistling his
mules, and the good apprentices lifted the litigious chest into the cart.
"Hi, hi!" said the advocate.
"Master, the chest is speaking," said an apprentice.
"In what language?" said the jeweller, giving him a good kick between
two features that luckily were not made of glass. The apprentice tumbled
over on to a stair in a way that induced him to discontinue his studies in
the language of chests. The shepherd, accompanied by the good jeweller,
carried all the baggage to the water-side without listening to the high
eloquence of the speaking wood, and having tied several stones to it, the
jeweller threw it into the Seine.
"Swim, my friend," cried the shepherd, in a voice sufficiently jeering at
the moment when the chest turned over, giving a pretty little plunge like
a duck.
Then Chiqoun continued to proceed along the quay, as far as the Rue- duport, St Laudry, near the cloisters of Notre Dame. There he noticed a
house, recognised the door, and knocked loudly.
"Open," said he, "open by order of the king."
Hearing this an old man who was no other than the famous Lombard,
Versoris, ran to the door.
"What is it?" said he.
"I am sent by the provost to warn you to keep good watch tonight,"
replied Chiquon, "as for his own part he will keep his archers ready. The
hunchback who has robbed you has come back again. Keep under arms,
for he is quite capable of easing you of the rest."
Having said this, the good shepherd took to his heels and ran to the Rue
des Marmouzets, to the house where Captain Cochegrue was feasting
with La Pasquerette, the prettiest of town-girls, and the most charming in
perversity that ever was; according to all the gay ladies, her glance was
sharp and piercing as the stab of a dagger. Her appearance was so
tickling to the sight, that it would have put all Paradise to rout. Besides
which she was as bold as a woman who has no other virtue than her
insolence. Poor Chiquon was greatly embarrassed while going to the
quarter of the Marmouzets. He was greatly afraid that he would be unable
to find the house of La Pasquerette, or find the two pigeons gone to roost,
but a good angel arranged there speedily to his satisfaction. This is how.
On entering the Rue des Marmouzets he saw several lights at the
windows and night-capped heads thrust out, and good wenches, gay girls,
housewives, husbands, and young ladies, all of them are just out of bed,
looking at each other as if a robber were being led to execution by
torchlight.
"What's the matter?" said the shepherd to a citizen who in great haste
had rushed to the door with a chamber utensil in his hand.
"Oh! it's nothing," replied the good man. "We thought it was the
Armagnacs descending upon the town, but it's only Mau-cinge beating La
Pasquerette."
"Where?" asked the shepherd.
"Below there, at that fine house where the pillars have the mouths of
flying frogs delicately carved upon them. Do you hear the varlets and the
serving maids?"
And in fact there was nothing but cries of "Murder! Help! Come some
one!" and in the house blows raining down and the Mau-cinge said with
his gruff voice:
"Death to the wench! Ah, you sing out now, do you? Ah, you want your
money now, do you? Take that--"
And La Pasquerette was groaning, "Oh! oh! I die! Help! Help! Oh! oh!"
Then came the blow of a sword and the heavy fall of a light body of the
fair girl sounded, and was followed by a great silence, after which the
lights were put out, servants, waiting women, roysterers, and others went
in again, and the shepherd who had come opportunely mounted the stairs
in company with them, but on beholding in the room above broken
glasses, slit carpets, and the cloth on the floor with the dishes, everyone
remained at a distance.
The shepherd, bold as a man with but one end in view, opened the door
of the handsome chamber where slept La Pasquerette, and found her
quite exhausted, her hair dishevelled, and her neck twisted, lying upon a
bloody carpet, and Mau-cinge frightened, with his tone considerably
lower, and not knowing upon what note to sing the remainder of his
anthem.
"Come, my little Pasquerette, don't pretend to be dead. Come, let me put
you tidy. Ah! little minx, dead or alive, you look so pretty in your blood
I'm going to kiss you." Having said which the cunning soldier took her and
threw her upon the bed, but she fell there all of a heap, and stiff as the
body of a man that had been hanged. Seeing which her companion found
it was time for his hump to retire from the game; however, the artful
fellow before slinking away said, "Poor Pasquerette, how could I murder
so good of girl, and one I loved so much? But, yes, I have killed her, the
thing is clear, for in her life never did her sweet breast hang down like
that. Good God, one would say it was a crown at the bottom of a wallet.
Thereupon Pasquerette opened her eyes and then bent her head slightly
to look at her flesh, which was white and firm, and she brought herself to
life by a box on the ears, administered to the captain.
"That will teach you to beware of the dead," said she, smiling.
"And why did he kill you, my cousin?" asked the shepherd.
"Why? Tomorrow the bailiffs seize everything that's here, and he who has
no more money than virtue, reproached me because I wished to be
agreeable to a handsome gentlemen, who would save me from the hands
of justice.
"Pasquerette, I'll break every bone in your skin."
"There, there!" said Chiquon, whom the Mau-cinge had just recognised,
"is that all? Oh, well, my good friend, I bring you a large sum."
"Where from?" asked the captain, astonished.
"Come here, and let me whisper in your ear--if 30,000 crowns were
walking about at night under the shadow of a pear-tree, would you not
stoop down to pluck them, to prevent them spoiling?"
"Chiquon, I'll kill you like a dog if you are making game of me, or I will
kiss you there where you like it, if you will put me opposite 30,000
crowns, even when it shall be necessary to kill three citizens at the corner
of the Quay."
"You will not even kill one. This is how the matter stands. I have for a
sweetheart in all loyalty, the servant of the Lombard who is in the city
near the house of our good uncle. Now I have just learned on sound
information that this dear man has departed this morning into the country
after having hidden under a pear-tree in his garden a good bushel of gold,
believing himself to be seen only by the angels. But the girl who had by
chance a bad toothache, and was taking the air at her garret window,
spied the old crookshanks, without wishing to do so, and chattered of it to
me in fondness. If you will swear to give me a good share I will lend you
my shoulders in order that you may climb on to the top of the wall and
from there throw yourself into the pear-tree, which is against the wall.
There, now do you say that I am a blockhead, an animal?"
"No, you are a right loyal cousin, an honest man, and if you have ever to
put an enemy out off the way, I am there, ready to kill even one of my
own friends for you. I am no longer your cousin, but your brother. Ho
there! sweetheart," cried Mau-cinge to La Pasquerette, "put the tables
straight, wipe up your blood, it belongs to me, and I'll pay you for it by
giving you a hundred times as much of mine as I have taken of thine.
Make the best of it, shake the black dog, off your back, adjust your
petticoats, laugh, I wish it, look to the stew, and let us recommence our 
evening prayer where we left it off. Tomorrow I'll make thee braver than
a queen. This is my cousin whom I wish to entertain, even when to do so
it were necessary to turn the house out of windows. We shall get back
everything tomorrow in the cellars. Come, fall to!"
Thus, and in less time than it takes a priest to say his Dominus vobiscum,
the whole rookery passed from tears to laughter as it had previously from
laughter to tears. It is only in these houses of ill- fame that love is made
with the blow of a dagger, and where tempests of joy rage between four
walls. But these are things ladies of the high-neck dress do not
understand.
The said captain Cochegrue was gay as a hundred schoolboys at the
breaking up of class, and made his good cousin drink deeply, who spilled
everything country fashion, and pretended to be drunk, spluttering out a
hundred stupidities, as, that "tomorrow he would buy Paris, would lend a
hundred thousand crowns to the king, that he would be able to roll in
gold;" in fact, talked so much nonsense that the captain, fearing some
compromising avowal and thinking his brain quite muddled enough, led
him outside with the good intention, instead of sharing with him, of
ripping Chiquon open to see if he had not a sponge in his stomach,
because he had just soaked in a big quart of the good wine of Suresne.
They went along, disputing about a thousand theological subjects which
got very much mixed up, and finished by rolling quietly up against the
garden where were the crowns of the Lombard. Then Cochegrue, making
a ladder of Chiquon's broad shoulders, jumped on to the pear-tree like a
man expert in attacks upon towns, but Versoris, who was watching him,
made a blow at his neck, and repeated it so vigorously that with three
blows fell the upper portion of the said Cochegrue, but not until he had
heard the clear voice of the shepherd, who cried to him, "Pick up your
head, my friend." Thereupon the generous Chiquon, in whom virtue
received its recompense, thought it would be wise to return to the house
of the good canon, whose heritage was by the grace of God considerably
simplified. Thus he gained the Rue St. Pierre-Aux-Boeufs with all speed,
and soon slept like a new-born baby, no longer knowing the meaning of
the word "cousin-german." Now, on the morrow he rose according to the
habit of shepherds, with the sun, and came into his uncle's room to
inquire if he spat white, if he coughed, if he had slept well; but the old 
servant told him that the canon, hearing the bells of St Maurice, the first
patron of Notre Dame, ring for matins, he had gone out of reverence to
the cathedral, where all the Chapter were to breakfast with the Bishop of
Paris; upon which Chiquon replied: "Is his reverence the canon out of his
senses thus to disport himself, to catch a cold, to get rheumatism? Does
he wish to die? I'll light a big fire to warm him when he returns;" and the
good shepherd ran into the room where the canon generally sat, and to
his great astonishment beheld him seated in his chair.
"Ah, ah! What did she mean, that fool of a Bruyette? I knew you were too
well advised to be shivering at this hour in your stall."
The canon said not a word. The shepherd who was like all thinkers, a man
of hidden sense, was quite aware that sometimes old men have strange
crotchets, converse with the essence of occult things, and mumble to
themselves discourses concerning matters not under consideration; so
that, from reverence and great respect for the secret meditations of the
canon, he went and sat down at a distance, and waited the termination of
these dreams; noticing, silently the length of the good man's nails, which
looked like cobbler's awls, and looking attentively at the feet of his uncle,
he was astonished to see the flesh of his legs so crimson, that it reddened
his breeches and seemed all on fire through his hose.
He is dead, thought Chiquon. At this moment the door of the room
opened, and he still saw the canon, who, his nose frozen, came back from
church.
"Ho, ho!" said Chiquon, "my dear Uncle, are you out of your senses?
Kindly take notice that you ought not to be at the door, because you are
already seated in your chair in the chimney corner, and that it is
impossible for there to be two canons like you in the world."
"Ah! Chiquon, there was a time when I could have wished to be in two
places at once, but such is not the fate of a man, he would be too happy.
Are you getting dim-sighted? I am alone here."
Then Chiquon turned his head towards the chair, and found it empty; and
much astonished, as you will easily believe, he approached it, and found 
on the seat a little pat of cinders, from which ascended a strong odour of
sulphur.
"Ah!" said he merrily, "I perceive that the devil has behaved well towards
me--I will pray God for him."
And thereupon he related naively to the canon how the devil had amused
himself by playing at providence, and had loyally aided him to get rid of
his wicked cousins, the which the canon admired much, and thought very
good, seeing that he had plenty of good sense left, and often had
observed things which were to the devil's advantage. So the good old
priest remarked that 'as much good was always met with in evil as evil in
good, and that therefore one should not trouble too much after the other
world, the which was a grave heresy, which many councils have put
right'.
And this was how the Chiquons became rich, and were able in these
times, by the fortunes of their ancestors, to help to build the bridge of St.
Michael, where the devil cuts a very good figure under the angel, in
memory of this adventure now consigned to these veracious histories



An Anarchist
by Joseph Conrad
THAT year I spent the best two months of the dry season on one of the
estates -- in fact, on the principal cattle estate -- of a famous meatextract manufacturing company.
B.O.S. Bos. You have seen the three magic letters on the advertisement
pages of magazines and newspapers, in the windows of provision
merchants, and on calendars for next year you receive by post in the
month of November. They scatter pamphlets also, written in a sickly
enthusiastic style and in several languages, giving statistics of slaughter
and bloodshed enough to make a Turk turn faint. The "art" illustrating
that "literature" represents in vivid and shining colours a large and
enraged black bull stamping upon a yellow snake writhing in emeraldgreen grass, with a cobaltblue sky for a background. It is atrocious and it
is an allegory. The snake symbolizes disease, weakness -- perhaps mere
hunger, which last is the chronic disease of the majority of mankind. Of
course everybody knows the B. 0. S. Ltd., with its unrivalled products:
Vinobos, Jellybos, and the latest unequalled perfection, Tribos, whose
nourishment is offered to you not only highly concentrated, but already
half digested. Such apparently is the love that Limited Company bears to
its fellowmen -- even as the love of the father and mother penguin for
their hungry fledglings.
Of course the capital of a country must be productively employed. I have
nothing to say against the company. But being myself animated by
feelings of affection towards my fellow-men, I am saddened by the
modern system of advertising. Whatever evidence it offers of enterprise,
ingenuity, impudence, and resource in certain individuals, it proves to my
mind the wide prevalence of that form of mental degradation which is
called gullibility.
In various parts of the civilized and uncivilized world I have had to
swallow B. 0. S. with more or less benefit to myself, though without great
pleasure. Prepared with hot water and abundantly peppered to bring out
the taste, this extract is not really unpalatable. But I have never
swallowed its advertisements. Perhaps they have not gone far enough. As
far as I can remember they make no promise of everlasting youth to the 
users of B. 0. S., nor yet have they claimed the power of raising the dead
for their estimable products. Why this austere reserve, I wonder? But I
don't think they would have had me even on these terms. Whatever form
of mental degradation I may (being but human) be suffering from, it is
not the popular form. I am not gullible.
I have been at some pains to bring out distinctly this statement about
myself in view of the story which follows. I have checked the facts as far
as possible. I have turned up the files of French newspapers, and I have
also talked with the officer who commands the military guard on the Ile
Royale, when in the course of my travels I reached Cayenne. I believe the
story to be in the main true. It is the sort of story that no man, I think,
would ever invent about himself, for it is neither grandiose nor flattering,
nor yet funny enough to gratify a perverted vanity.
It concerns the engineer of the steam-launch belonging to the Maranon
cattle estate of the B. 0. S. Co., Ltd. This estate is also an island -- an
island as big as a small province, lying in the estuary of a great South
American river. It is wild and not beautiful, but the grass growing on its
low plains seems to possess exceptionally nourishing and flavouring
qualities. It resounds with the lowing of innumerable herds -- a deep and
distressing sound under the open sky, rising like a monstrous protest of
prisoners condemned to death. On the mainland, across twenty miles of
discoloured muddy water, there stands a city whose name, let us say, is
Horta.
But the most interesting characteristic of this island (which seems like a
sort of penal settlement for condemned cattle) consists in its being the
only known habitat of an extremely rare and gorgeous butterfly. The
species is even more rare than it is beautiful, which is not saying little. I
have already alluded to my travels. I travelled at that time, but strictly for
myself and with a moderation unknown in our days of round-the-world
tickets. I even travelled with a purpose. As a matter of fact, I am -- "Ha,
ha, ha! -- a desperate butterfly-slayer. Ha, ha, ha!"
This was the tone in which Mr. Harry Gee, the manager of the cattle
station, alluded to my pursuits. He seemed to consider me the greatest
absurdity in the world. On the other hand, the B. 0. S. Co., Ltd.,
represented to him the acme of the nineteenth century's achievement. I
believe that he slept in his leggings and spurs. His days he spent in the
saddle flying over the plains, followed by a train of half-wild horsemen, 
who called him Don Enrique, and who had no definite idea of the B. 0. S.
Co., Ltd., which paid their wages. He was an excellent manager, but I
don't see why, when we met at meals, he should have thumped me on
the back, with loud, derisive inquiries: "How's the deadly sport to-day?
Butterflies going strong? Ha, ha, ha!" -- especially as he charged me two
dollars per diem for the hospitality of the B. 0. S. Co., Ltd., (capital
L1,500,000, fully paid up), in whose balance-sheet for that year those
monies are no doubt included. "I don't think I can make it anything less in
justice to my company," he had remarked, with extreme gravity, when I
was arranging with him the terms of my stay on the island.
His chaff would have been harmless enough if intimacy of intercourse in
the absence of all friendly feeling were not a thing detestable in itself.
Moreover, his facetiousness was not very amusing. It consisted in the
wearisome repetition of descriptive phrases applied to people with a burst
of laughter. "Desperate butterfly-slayer. Ha, ha, ha!" was one sample of
his peculiar wit which he himself enjoyed so much. And in the same vein
of exquisite humour he called my attention to the engineer of the steamlaunch, one day, as we strolled on the path by the side of the creek.
The man's head and shoulders emerged above the deck, over which were
scattered various tools of his trade and a few pieces of machinery. He was
doing some repairs to the engines. At the sound of our foot-steps he
raised anxiously a grimy face with a pointed chin and a tiny fair
moustache. What could be seen of his delicate features under the black
smudges appeared to me wasted and livid in the greenish shade of the
enormous tree spreading its foliage over the launch moored close to the
bank.
To my great surprise, Harry Gee addressed him as "Crocodile," in that
half-jeering, half-bullying tone which is characteristic of self-satisfaction in
his delectable kind:
"How does the work get on, Crocodile?"
I should have said before that the amiable Harry had picked up French of
a sort somewhere -- in some colony or other -- and that he pronounced it
with a disagreeable forced precision as though he meant to guy the
language. The man in the launch answered him quickly in a pleasant
voice. His eyes had a liquid softness and his teeth flashed dazzlingly white 
between his thin, drooping lips. The manager turned to me, very cheerful
and loud, explaining:
"I call him Crocodile because he lives half in, half out of the creek.
Amphibious -- see? There's nothing else amphibious living on the island
except crocodiles; so he must belong to the species -- eh? But in reality
he's nothing less than un citoyen anarchiste de Barcelone."
"A citizen anarchist from Barcelona?" I repeated, stupidly, looking down
at the man. He had turned to his work in the engine-well of the launch
and presented his bowed back to us. In that attitude I heard him protest,
very audibly:
"I do not even know Spanish."
"Hey? What? You dare to deny you come from over there?" the
accomplished manager was down on him truculently.
At this the man straightened himself up, dropping a spanner he had been
using, and faced us; but he trembled in all his limbs.
"I deny nothing, nothing, nothing!" he said, excitedly.
He picked up the spanner and went to work again without paying any
further attention to us. After looking at him for a minute or so, we went
away.
"Is he really an anarchist?" I asked, when out of ear-shot.
"I don't care a hang what he is," answered the humorous official of the B.
0. S. Co. "I gave him the name because it suited me to label him in that
way, It's good for the company."
"For the company!" I exclaimed, stopping short.
"Aha!" he triumphed, tilting up his hairless pug face and straddling his
thin, long legs. "That surprises you. I am bound to do my best for my
company. They have enormous expenses. Why -- our agent in Horta tells
me they spend fifty thousand pounds every year in advertising all over
the world! One can't be too economical in working the show. Well, just
you listen. When I took charge here the estate had no steam-launch. I 
asked for one, and kept on asking by every mail till I got it; but the man
they sent out with it chucked his job at the end of two months, leaving
the launch moored at the pontoon in Horta. Got a better screw at a
sawmill up the river -- blast him! And ever since it has been the same
thing. Any Scotch or Yankee vagabond that likes to call himself a
mechanic out here gets eighteen pounds a month, and the next you know
he's cleared out, after smashing something as likely as not. I give you my
word that some of the objects I've had for engine-drivers couldn't tell the
boiler from the funnel. But this fellow understands his trade, and I don't
mean him to clear out. See?"
And he struck me lightly on the chest for emphasis. Disregarding his
peculiarities of manner, I wanted to know what all this had to do with the
man being an anarchist.
"Come!" jeered the manager. "If you saw suddenly a barefooted,
unkempt chap slinking amongst the bushes on the sea face of the island,
and at the same time observed less than a mile from the beach, a small
schooner full of niggers hauling off in a hurry, you wouldn't think the man
fell there from the sky, would you? And it could be nothing else but either
that or Cayenne. I've got my wits about me. Directly I sighted this queer
game I said to myself -- 'Escaped Convict.' I was as certain of it as I am
of seeing you standing here this minute. So I spurred on straight at him.
He stood his ground for a bit on a sand hillock crying out: 'Monsieur!
Monsieur! Arretez!' then at the last moment broke and ran for life. Says I
to myself, 'I'll tame you before I'm done with you.' So without a single
word I kept on, heading him off here and there. I rounded him up towards
the shore, and at last I had him corralled on a spit, his heels in the water
and nothing but sea and sky at his back, with my horse pawing the sand
and shaking his head within a yard of him.
"He folded his arms on his breast then and stuck his chin up in a sort of
desperate way; but I wasn't to be impressed by the beggar's posturing.
"Says I, 'You're a runaway convict.'
"When he heard French, his chin went down and his face changed.
"'I deny nothing,' says he, panting yet, for I had kept him skipping about
in front of my horse pretty smartly. I asked him what he was doing there.
He had got his breath by then, and explained that he had meant to make 
his way to a farm which he understood (from the schooner's people, I
suppose) was to be found in the neighbourhood. At that I laughed aloud
and he got uneasy. Had he been deceived? Was there no farm within
walking distance?
"I laughed more and more. He was on foot, and of course the first bunch
of cattle he came across would have stamped him to rags under their
hoofs. A dismounted man caught on the feeding-grounds hasn't got the
ghost of a chance.
"'My coming upon you like this has certainly saved your life,' I said. He
remarked that perhaps it was so; but that for his part he had imagined I
had wanted to kill him under the hoofs of my horse. I assured him that
nothing would have been easier had I meant it. And then we came to a
sort of dead stop. For the life of me I didn't know what to do with this
convict, unless I chucked him into the sea. It occurred to me to ask him
what he had been transported for. He hung his head.
"'What is it?' says I. 'Theft, murder, rape, or what?' I wanted to hear what
he would have to say for himself, though of course I expected it would be
some sort of lie. But all he said was --
"'Make it what you like. I deny nothing. It is no good denying anything.'
"I looked him over carefully and a thought struck me.
"'They've got anarchists there, too,' I said. 'Perhaps you're one of them.'
"'I deny nothing whatever, monsieur,' he repeats.
"This answer made me think that perhaps he was not an anarchist. I
believe those damned lunatics are rather proud of themselves. If he had
been one, he would have probably confessed straight out.
"'What were you before you became a convict?'
"'Ouvrier,' he says. 'And a good workman, too.'
"At that I began to think he must be an anarchist, after all. That's the
class they come mostly from, isn't it? I hate the cowardly bomb-throwing
brutes. I almost made up my mind to turn my horse short round and 
leave him to starve or drown where he was, whichever he liked best. As
to crossing the island to bother me again, the cattle would see to that. I
don't know what induced me to ask --
"'What sort of workman?'
"I didn't care a hang whether he answered me or not. But when he said at
once, 'Mecanicien, monsieur,' I nearly jumped out of the saddle with
excitement. The launch had been lying disabled and idle in the creek for
three weeks. My duty to the company was clear. He noticed my start, too,
and there we were for a minute or so staring at each other as if
bewitched.
"'Get up on my horse behind me,' I told him. 'You shall put my steamlaunch to rights.'"
These are the words in which the worthy manager of the Maranon estate
related to me the coming of the supposed anarchist. He meant to keep
him -- out of a sense of duty to the company -- and the name he had
given him would prevent the fellow from obtaining employment anywhere
in Horta. The vaqueros of the estate, when they went on leave, spread it
all over the town. They did not know what an anarchist was, nor yet what
Barcelona meant. They called him Anarchisto de Barcelona, as if it were
his Christian name and surname. But the people in town had been reading
in their papers about the anarchists in Europe and were very much
impressed. Over the jocular addition of "de Barcelona" Mr. Harry Gee
chuckled with immense satisfaction. "That breed is particularly
murderous, isn't it? It makes the sawmills crowd still more afraid of
having anything to do with him -- see?" he exulted, candidly. "I hold him
by that name better than if I had him chained up by the leg to the deck of
the steam launch.
"And mark," he added, after a pause, "he does not deny it. I am not
wronging him in any way. He is a convict of some sort, anyhow."
"But I suppose you pay him some wages, don't you?" I asked.
"Wages! What does he want with money here? He gets his food from my
kitchen and his clothing from the store. Of course I'll give him something
at the end of the year, but you don't think I'd employ a convict and give 
him the same money I would give an honest man? I am looking after the
interests of my company first and last."
I admitted that, for a company spending fifty thousand pounds every year
in advertising, the strictest economy was obviously necessary. The
manager of the Maranon Estancia grunted approvingly.
"And I'll tell you what," he continued: "if I were certain he's an anarchist
and he had the cheek to ask me for money, I would give him the toe of
my boot. However, let him have the benefit of the doubt. I am perfectly
willing to take it that he has done nothing worse than to stick a knife into
somebody -- with extenuating circumstances -- French fashion, don't you
know. But that subversive sanguinary rot of doing away with all law and
order in the world makes my blood boil. It's simply cutting the ground
from under the feet of every decent, respectable, hard-working person. I
tell you that the consciences of people who have them, like you or I, must
be protected in some way; or else the first low scoundrel that came along
would in every respect be just as good as myself. Wouldn't he, now? And
that's absurd!"
He glared at me. I nodded slightly and murmured that doubtless there
was much subtle truth in his view.
The principal truth discoverable in the views of Paul the engineer was that
a little thing may bring about the undoing of a man.
"Il ne faut pas beaucoup pour perdre un homme," he said to me,
thoughtfully, one evening.
report this reflection in French, since the man was of Paris, not of
Barcelona at all. At the Maranon he lived apart from the station, in a small
shed with a metal roof and straw walls, which he called mon atelier. He
had a work-bench there. They had given him several horse-blankets and
a saddle -- not that he ever had occasion to ride, but because no other
bedding was used by the working-hands, who were all vaqueros --
cattlemen. And on this horseman's gear, like a son of the plains, he used
to sleep amongst the tools of his trade, in a litter of rusty scrap-iron, with
a portable forge at his head, under the work-bench sustaining his grimy
mosquito-net.
Now and then I would bring him a few candle ends saved from the scant
supply of the manager's house. He was very thankful for these. He did not
like to lie awake in the dark, he confessed. He complained that sleep fled
from him. "Le sommeil me fuit," he declared, with his habitual air of
subdued stoicism, which made him sympathetic and touching. I made it
clear to him that I did not attach undue importance to the fact of his
having been a convict.
Thus it came about that one evening he was led to talk about himself. As
one of the bits of candle on the edge of the bench burned down to the
end, he hastened to light another.
He had done his military service in a provincial garrison and returned to
Paris to follow his trade. It was a well-paid one. He told me with some
pride that in a short time he was earning no less than ten francs a day.
He was thinking of setting up for himself by and by and of getting
married.
Here he sighed deeply and paused. Then with a return to his stoical note:
"It seems I did not know enough about myself."
On his twenty-fifth birthday two of his friends in the repairing shop where
he worked proposed to stand him a dinner. He was immensely touched by
this attention.
"I was a steady man," he remarked, "but I am not less sociable than any
other body."
The entertainment came off in a little cafe on the Boulevard de la
Chapelle. At dinner they drank some special wine. It was excellent.
Everything was excellent; and the world -- in his own words -- seemed a
very good place to live in. He had good prospects, some little money laid
by, and the affection of two excellent friends. He offered to pay for all the
drinks after dinner, which was only proper on his part.
They drank more wine; they drank liqueurs, cognac, beer, then more
liqueurs and more cognac. Two strangers sitting at the next table looked
at him, he said, with so much friendliness, that he invited them to join the
party.
He had never drunk so much in his life. His elation was extreme, and so
pleasurable that whenever it flagged he hastened to order more drinks.
"It seemed to me," he said, in his quiet tone and looking on the ground in
the gloomy shed full of shadows, "that I was on the point of just attaining
a great and wonderful felicity. Another drink, I felt, would do it. The
others were holding out well with me, glass for glass."
But an extraordinary thing happened. At something the strangers said his
elation fell. Gloomy ideas-- des idees noires -- rushed into his head. All
the world outside the cafe; appeared to him as a dismal evil place where
a multitude of poor wretches had to work and slave to the sole end that a
few individuals should ride in carriages and live riotously in palaces. He
became ashamed of his happiness. The pity of mankind's cruel lot wrung
his heart. In a voice choked with sorrow he tried to express these
sentiments. He thinks he wept and swore in turns.
The two new acquaintances hastened to applaud his humane indignation.
Yes. The amount of injustice in the world was indeed scandalous. There
was only one way of dealing with the rotten state of society. Demolish the
whole sacree boutique. Blow up the whole iniquitous show.
Their heads hovered over the table. They whispered to him eloquently; I
don't think they quite expected the result. He was extremely drunk --
mad drunk. With a howl of rage he leaped suddenly upon the table.
Kicking over the bottles and glasses, he yelled: "Vive l'anarchie! Death to
the capitalists!" He yelled this again and again. All round him broken glass
was falling, chairs were being swung in the air, people were taking each
other by the throat. The police dashed in. He hit, bit, scratched and
struggled, till something crashed down upon his head. . . .
He came to himself in a police cell, locked up on a charge of assault,
seditious cries, and anarchist propaganda.
He looked at me fixedly with his liquid, shining eyes, that seemed very big
in the dim light.
"That was bad. But even then I might have got off somehow, perhaps,"
he said, slowly.
I doubt it. But whatever chance he had was done away with by a young
socialist lawyer who volunteered to undertake his defence. In vain he
assured him that he was no anarchist; that he was a quiet, respectable
mechanic, only too anxious to work ten hours per day at his trade. He
was represented at the trial as the victim of society and his drunken
shoutings as the expression of infinite suffering. The young lawyer had his
way to make, and this case was just what he wanted for a start. The
speech for the defence was pronounced magnificent.
The poor fellow paused, swallowed, and brought out the statement:
"I got the maximum penalty applicable to a first offence."
I made an appropriate murmur. He hung his head and folded his arms.
"When they let me out of prison," he began, gently, "I made tracks, of
course, for my old workshop. My patron had a particular liking for me
before; but when he saw me he turned green with fright and showed me
the door with a shaking hand."
While he stood in the street, uneasy and disconcerted, he was accosted
by a middle-aged man who introduced himself as an engineer's fitter, too.
"I know who you are," he said. "I have attended your trial. You are a
good comrade and your ideas are sound. But the devil of it is that you
won't be able to get work anywhere now. These bourgeois'll conspire to
starve you. That's their way. Expect no mercy from the rich."
To be spoken to so kindly in the street had comforted him very much. His
seemed to be the sort of nature needing support and sympathy. The idea
of not being able to find work had knocked him over completely. If his
patron, who knew him so well for a quiet, orderly, competent workman,
would have nothing to do with him now -- then surely nobody else would.
That was clear. The police, keeping their eye on him, would hasten to
warn every employer inclined to give him a chance. He felt suddenly very
helpless, alarmed and idle; and he followed the middle-aged man to the
estaminet round the corner where he met some other good companions.
They assured him that he would not be allowed to starve, work or no
work. They had drinks all round to the discomfiture of all employers of
labour and to the destruction of society.
He sat biting his lower lip.
"That is, monsieur, how I became a compagnon," he said. The hand he
passed over his forehead was trembling. "All the same, there's something
wrong in a world where a man can get lost for a glass more or less."
He never looked up, though I could see he was getting excited under his
dejection. He slapped the bench with his open palm.
"No!" he cried. "It was an impossible existence! Watched by the police,
watched by the comrades, I did not belong to myself any more! Why, I
could not even go to draw a few francs from my savings-bank without a
comrade hanging about the door to see that I didn't bolt! And most of
them were neither more nor less than housebreakers. The intelligent, I
mean. They robbed the rich; they were only getting back their own, they
said. When I had had some drink I believed them. There were also the
fools and the mad. Des exaltes -- quoi! When I was drunk I loved them.
When I got more drink I was angry with the world. That was the best
time. I found refuge from misery in rage. But one can't be always drunk -
- n'est-ce pas, monsieur? And when I was sober I was afraid to break
away. They would have stuck me like a pig."
He folded his arms again and raised his sharp chin with a bitter smile.
"By and by they told me it was time to go to work. The work was to rob a
bank. Afterwards a bomb would be thrown to wreck the place. My
beginner's part would be to keep watch in a street at the back and to take
care of a black bag with the bomb inside till it was wanted. After the
meeting at which the affair was arranged a trusty comrade did not leave
me an inch. I had not dared to protest; I was afraid of being done away
with quietly in that room; only, as we were walking together I wondered
whether it would not be better for me to throw myself suddenly into the
Seine. But while I was turning it over in my mind we had crossed the
bridge, and afterwards I had not the opportunity."
In the light of the candle end, with his sharp features, fluffy little
moustache, and oval face, he looked at times delicately and gaily young,
and then appeared quite old, decrepit, full of sorrow, pressing his folded
arms to his breast.
As he remained silent I felt bound to ask:
"Well! And how did it end?"
"Deportation to Cayenne," he answered.
He seemed to think that somebody had given the plot away. As he was
keeping watch in the back street, bag in hand, he was set upon by the
police. "These imbeciles," had knocked him down without noticing what
he had in his hand. He wondered how the bomb failed to explode as he
fell. But it didn't explode.
"I tried to tell my story in court," he continued. "The president was
amused. There were in the audience some idiots who laughed."
I expressed the hope that some of his companions had been caught, too.
He shuddered slightly before he told me that there were two -- Simon,
called also Biscuit, the middle-aged fitter who spoke to him in the street,
and a fellow of the name of Mafile, one of the sympathetic strangers who
had applauded his sentiments and consoled his humanitarian sorrows
when he got drunk in the cafe.
"Yes," he went on, with an effort, "I had the advantage of their company
over there on St. Joseph's Island, amongst some eighty or ninety other
convicts. We were all classed as dangerous."
St. Joseph's Island is the prettiest of the Iles de Salut. It is rocky and
green, with shallow ravines, bushes, thickets, groves of mango-trees, and
many feathery palms. Six warders armed with revolvers and carbines are
in charge of the convicts kept there.
An eight-oared galley keeps up the communication in the daytime, across
a channel a quarter of a mile wide, with the Ile Royale, where there is a
military post. She makes the first trip at six in the morning. At four in the
afternoon her service is over, and she is then hauled up into a little dock
on the Ile Royale and a sentry put over her and a few smaller boats. From
that time till next morning the island of St. Joseph remains cut off from
the rest of the world, with the warders patrolling in turn the path from the
warders' house to the convict huts, and a multitude of sharks patrolling
the waters all round.
Under these circumstances the convicts planned a mutiny. Such a thing
had never been known in the penitentiary's history before. But their plan 
was not without some possibility of success. The warders were to be
taken by surprise and murdered during the night. Their arms would
enable the convicts to shoot down the people in the galley as she came
alongside in the morning. The galley once in their possession, other boats
were to be captured, and the whole company was to row away up the
coast.
At dusk the two warders on duty mustered the convicts as usual. Then
they proceeded to inspect the huts to ascertain that everything was in
order. In the second they entered they were set upon and absolutely
smothered under the numbers of their assailants. The twilight faded
rapidly. It was a new moon; and a heavy black squall gathering over the
coast increased the profound darkness of the night. The convicts
assembled in the open space, deliberating upon the next step to be taken,
argued amongst themselves in low voices.
"You took part in all this?" I asked.
"No. I knew what was going to be done, of course. But why should I kill
these warders? I had nothing against them. But I was afraid of the
others. Whatever happened, I could not escape from them. I sat alone on
the stump of a tree with my head in my hands, sick at heart at the
thought of a freedom that could be nothing but a mockery to me.
Suddenly I was startled to perceive the shape of a man on the path near
by. He stood perfectly still, then his form became effaced in the night. It
must have been the chief warder coming to see what had become of his
two men. No one noticed him. The convicts kept on quarrelling over their
plans. The leaders could not get themselves obeyed. The fierce
whispering of that dark mass of men was very horrible.
"At last they divided into two parties and moved off. When they had
passed me I rose, weary and hopeless. The path to the warders' house
was dark and silent, but on each side the bushes rustled slightly.
Presently I saw a faint thread of light before me. The chief warder,
followed by his three men, was approaching cautiously. But he had failed
to close his dark lantern properly. The convicts had seen that faint gleam,
too. There was an awful savage yell, a turmoil on the dark path, shots
fired, blows, groans: and with the sound of smashed bushes, the shouts
of the pursuers and the screams of the pursued, the man-hunt, the
warder-hunt, passed by me into the interior of the island. I was alone.
And I assure you, monsieur, I was indifferent to everything. After 
standing still for a while, I walked on along the path till I kicked
something hard. I stooped and picked up a warder's revolver. I felt with
my fingers that it was loaded in five chambers. In the gusts of wind I
heard the convicts calling to each other far away, and then a roll of
thunder would cover the soughing and rustling of the trees. Suddenly, a
big light ran across my path very low along the ground. And it showed a
woman's skirt with the edge of an apron.
"I knew that the person who carried it must be the wife of the head
warder. They had forgotten all about her, it seems. A shot rang out in the
interior of the island, and she cried out to herself as she ran. She passed
on. I followed, and presently I saw her again. She was pulling at the cord
of the big bell which hangs at the end of the landing-pier, with one hand,
and with the other she was swinging the heavy lantern to and fro. This is
the agreed signal for the Ile Royale should assistance be required at
night. The wind carried the sound away from our island and the light she
swung was hidden on the shore side by the few trees that grow near the
warders' house.
"I came up quite close to her from behind. She went on without stopping,
without looking aside, as though she had been all alone on the island. A
brave woman, monsieur. I put the revolver inside the breast of my blue
blouse and waited. A flash of lightning and a clap of thunder destroyed
both the sound and the light of the signal for an instant, but she never
faltered, pulling at the cord and swinging the lantern as regularly as a
machine. She was a comely woman of thirty -- no more. I thought to
myself, 'All that's no good on a night like this.' And I made up my mind
that if a body of my fellow-convicts came down to the pier -- which was
sure to happen soon -- I would shoot her through the head before I shot
myself. I knew the 'comrades' well. This idea of mine gave me quite an.
interest in life, monsieur; and at once, instead of remaining stupidly
exposed on the pier, I retreated a little way and crouched behind a bush.
I did not intend to let myself be pounced upon unawares and be
prevented perhaps from rendering a supreme service to at least one
human creature before I died myself.
"But we must believe the signal was seen, for the galley from Ile Royale
came over in an astonishingly short time. The woman kept right on till the
light of her lantern flashed upon the officer in command and the bayonets
of the soldiers in the boat. Then she sat down and began to cry.
"She didn't need me any more. I did not budge. Some soldiers were only
in their shirt-sleeves, others without boots, just as the call to arms had
found them. They passed by my bush at the double. The galley had been
sent away for more; and the woman sat all alone crying at the end of the
pier, with the lantern standing on the ground near her.
"Then suddenly I saw in the light at the end of the pier the red pantaloons
of two more men. I was overcome with astonishment. They, too, started
off at a run. Their tunics flapped unbuttoned and they were bare-headed.
One of them panted out to the other, 'Straight on, straight on!'
"Where on earth did they spring from, I wondered. Slowly I walked down
the short pier. I saw the woman's form shaken by sobs and heard her
moaning more and more distinctly, 'Oh, my man! my poor man! my poor
man!' I stole on quietly. She could neither hear nor see anything. She had
thrown her apron over her head and was rocking herself to and fro in her
grief. But I remarked a small boat fastened to the end of the pier.
"Those two men -- they looked like sous-officiers -- must have come in it,
after being too late, I suppose, for the galley. It is incredible that they
should have thus broken the regulations from a sense of duty. And it was
a stupid thing to do. I could not believe my eyes in the very moment I
was stepping into that boat.
"I pulled along the shore slowly. A black cloud hung over the Iles de
Salut. I heard firing, shouts. Another hunt had begun -- the convict-hunt.
The oars were too long to pull comfortably. I managed them with
difficulty, though the boat herself was light. But when I got round to the
other side of the island the squall broke in rain and wind. I was unable to
make head against it. I let the boat drift ashore and secured her.
"I knew the spot. There was a tumbledown old hovel standing near the
water. Cowering in there I heard through the noises of the wind and the
falling downpour some people tearing through the bushes. They came out
on the strand. Soldiers perhaps. A flash of lightning threw everything near
me into violent relief. Two convicts!
"And directly an amazed voice exclaimed. 'It's a miracle!' It was the voice
of Simon, otherwise Biscuit.
"And another voice growled, 'What's a miracle?'
"'Why, there's a boat lying here!'
"'You must be mad, Simon! But there is, after all. . . . A boat.'
"They seemed awed into complete silence. The other man was Mafile. He
spoke again, cautiously.
"'It is fastened up. There must be somebody here.'
"I spoke to them from within the hovel: 'I am here.'
"They came in then, and soon gave me to understand that the boat was
theirs, not mine. 'There are two of us,' said Mafile, 'against you alone.'
"I got out into the open to keep clear of them for fear of getting a
treacherous blow on the head. I could have shot them both where they
stood. But I said nothing. I kept down the laughter rising in my throat. I
made myself very humble and begged to be allowed to go. They
consulted in low tones about my fate, while with my hand on the revolver
in the bosom of my blouse I had their lives in my power. I let them live. I
meant them to pull that boat. I represented to them with abject humility
that I understood the management of a boat, and that, being three to
pull, we could get a rest in turns. That decided them at last. It was time.
A little more and I would have gone into screaming fits at the drollness of
it."
At this point his excitement broke out. He jumped off the bench and
gesticulated. The great shadows of his arms darting over roof and walls
made the shed appear too small to contain his agitation.
"I deny nothing," he burst out. "I was elated, monsieur. I tasted a sort of
felicity. But I kept very quiet. I took my turns at pulling all through the
night. We made for the open sea, putting our trust in a passing ship. It
was a foolhardy action. I persuaded them to it. When the sun rose the
immensity of water was calm, and the Iles de Salut appeared only like
dark specks from the top of each swell. I was steering then. Mafile, who
was pulling bow, let out an oath and said, 'We must rest.'
'The time to laugh had come at last. And I took my fill of it, I can tell you.
I held my sides and rolled in my seat, they had such startled faces.
'What's got into him, the animal?' cries Mafile.
"And Simon, who was nearest to me, says over his shoulder to him, 'Devil
take me if I don't think he's gone mad!'
"Then I produced the revolver. Aha! In a moment they both got the
stoniest eyes you can imagine. Ha, ha! They were frightened. But they
pulled. Oh, yes, they pulled all day, sometimes looking wild and
sometimes looking faint. I lost nothing of it because I had to keep my
eyes on them all the time, or else -- crack! -- they would have been on
top of me in a second. I rested my revolver hand on my knee all ready
and steered with the other. Their faces began to blister. Sky and sea
seemed on fire round us and the sea steamed in the sun. The boat made
a sizzling sound as she went through the water. Sometimes Mafile foamed
at the mouth and sometimes he groaned. But he pulled. He dared not
stop. His eyes became blood-shot all over, and he had bitten his lower lip
to pieces. Simon was as hoarse as a crow.
"'Comrade --' he begins.
'"There are no comrades here. I am your patron.'
"'Patron, then,' he says, 'in the name of humanity let us rest.'
"I let them. There was a little rainwater washing about the bottom of the
boat. I permitted them to snatch some of it in the hollow of their palms.
But as I gave the command, 'En route!' I caught them exchanging
significant glances. They thought I would have to go to sleep sometime!
Aha! But I did not want to go to sleep. I was more awake than ever. It is
they who went to sleep as they pulled, tumbling off the thwarts head over
heels suddenly, one after another. I let them lie. All the stars were out. It
was a quiet world. The sun rose. Another day. Allez! En route! "They
pulled badly. Their eyes rolled about and their tongues hung out. In the
middle of the forenoon Mafile croaks out: 'Let us make a rush at him,
Simon. I would just as soon be shot at once as to die of thirst, hunger,
and fatigue at the oar.'
"But while he spoke he pulled; and Simon kept on pulling too. It made me
smile. Ah! They loved their life these two, in this evil world of theirs, just 
as I used to love my life, too, before they spoiled it for me with their
phrases. I let them go on to the point of exhaustion, and only then I
pointed at the sails of a ship on the horizon.
"Aha! You should have seen them revive and buckle to their work! For I
kept them at it to pull right across that ship's path. They were changed.
The sort of pity I had felt for them left me. They looked more like
themselves every minute. They looked at me with the glances I
remembered so well. They were happy. They smiled.
"'Well,' says Simon, 'the energy of that youngster has saved our lives. If
he hadn't made us, we could never have pulled so far out into the track of
ships. Comrade, I forgive you. I admire you.'
"And Mafile growls from forward: 'We owe you a famous debt of gratitude,
comrade. You are cut out for a chief.'
"Comrade! Monsieur! Ah, what a good word! And they, such men as these
two, had made it accursed. I looked at them. I remembered their lies,
their promises, their menaces, and all my days of misery. Why could they
not have left me alone after I came out of prison? I looked at them and
thought that while they lived I could never be free. Never. Neither I nor
others like me with warm hearts and weak heads. For I know I have not a
strong head, monsieur. A black rage came upon me -- the rage of
extreme intoxication -- but not against the injustice of society. Oh, no!
"'I must be free!' I cried, furiously.
"'Vive la liberte!" yells that ruffian Mafile. 'Mort aux bourgeois who send
us to Cayenne! They shall soon know that we are free.'
"The sky, the sea, the whole horizon, seemed to turn red, blood red all
round the boat. My temples were beating so loud that I wondered they
did not hear. How is it that they did not? How is it they did not
understand?
"I heard Simon ask, 'Have we not pulled far enough out now?'
"'Yes. Far enough,' I said. I was sorry for him; it was the other I hated.
He hauled in his oar with a loud sigh, and as he was raising his hand to
wipe his forehead with the air of a man who has done his work, I pulled 
the trigger of my revolver and shot him like this off the knee, right
through the heart.
"He tumbled down, with his head hanging over the side of the boat. I did
not give him a second glance. The other cried out piercingly. Only one
shriek of horror. Then all was still.
"He slipped off the thwart on to his knees and raised his clasped hands
before his face in an attitude of supplication. 'Mercy,' he whispered,
faintly. 'Mercy for me! -- comrade.'
"'Ah, comrade,' I said, in a low tone. 'Yes, comrade, of course. Well, then,
shout Vive l'anarchie.'
"He flung up his arms, his face up to the sky and his mouth wide open in
a great yell of despair. 'Vive l'anarchie! Vive --'
"He collapsed all in a heap, with a bullet through his head.
"I flung them both overboard. I threw away the revolver, too. Then I sat
down quietly. I was free at last! At last. I did not even look towards the
ship; I did not care; indeed, I think I must have gone to sleep, because
all of a sudden there were shouts and I found the ship almost on top of
me. They hauled me on board and secured the boat astern. They were all
blacks, except the captain, who was a mulatto. He alone knew a few
words of French. I could not find out where they were going nor who they
were. They gave me something to eat every day; but I did not like the
way they used to discuss me in their language. Perhaps they were
deliberating about throwing me overboard in order to keep possession of
the boat. How do I know? As we were passing this island I asked whether
it was inhabited. I understood from the mulatto that there was a house on
it. A farm, I fancied, they meant. So I asked them to put me ashore on
the beach and keep the boat for their trouble. This, I imagine, was just
what they wanted. The rest you know."
After pronouncing these words he lost suddenly all control over himself.
He paced to and fro rapidly, till at last he broke into a run; his arms went
like a windmill and his ejaculations became very much like raving. The
burden of them was that he "denied nothing, nothing!" I could only let
him go on, and sat out of his way, repeating, "Calmez vous, calmez
vous," at intervals, till his agitation exhausted itself.
I must confess, too, that I remained there long after he had crawled
under his mosquito-net. He had entreated me not to leave him; so, as
one sits up with a nervous child, I sat up with him -- in the name of
humanity -- till he fell asleep.
On the whole, my idea is that he was much more of an anarchist than he
confessed to me or to himself; and that, the special features of his case
apart, he was very much like many other anarchists. Warm heart and
weak head -- that is the word of the riddle; and it is a fact that the
bitterest contradictions and the deadliest conflicts of the world are carried
on in every individual breast capable of feeling and passion.
From personal inquiry I can vouch that the story of the convict mutiny
was in every particular as stated by him.
When I got back to Horta from Cayenne and saw the "Anarchist" again,
he did not look well. He was more worn, still more frail, and very livid
indeed under the grimy smudges of his calling. Evidently the meat of the
company's main herd (in its unconcentrated form) did not agree with him
at all.
It was on the pontoon in Horta that we met; and I tried to induce him to
leave the launch moored where she was and follow me to Europe there
and then. It would have been delightful to think of the excellent
manager's surprise and disgust at the poor fellow's escape. But he
refused with unconquerable obstinacy.
"Surely you don't mean to live always here!" I cried. He shook his head.
"I shall die here," he said. Then added moodily, "Away from them."
Sometimes I think of him lying open-eyed on his horseman's gear in the
low shed full of tools and scraps of iron -- the anarchist slave of the
Maranon estate, waiting with resignation for that sleep which "fled" from
him, as he used to say, in such an unaccountable manner.



The Love-Charm
A short story by Thomas de Quincey
Emilius was sitting in deep thought at his table, awaiting his friend
Roderick. The light was burning before him; the winter evening was cold;
and to-day he wished for the presence of his fellow-traveller, though at
other times wont rather to avoid his society: for on this evening he was
about to disclose a secret to him, and beg for his advice. The timid, shy
Emilius found in every business and accident of life so many difficulties,
such insurmountable hindrances, that it might seem to have been an
ironical whim of his destiny which brought him and Roderick together,
Roderick being in everything the reverse of his friend. Inconstant, flighty,
always determined by the first impression, and kindling in an instant, he
engaged in everything, had a plan for every occasion; no undertaking was
too arduous for him, no obstacle could deter him. But in the midst of the
pursuit he slackened and wearied just as suddenly as at first he had
caught fire and sprung forward. Whatever then opposed him, was for him
not a spur to urge him onward, but only led him to abandon what he had
so hotly rushed into; so that Roderick was every day thoughtlessly
beginning something new, and with no better cause relinquishing and idly
forgetting what he had begun the day before. Hence, never a day passed
but the friends got into a quarrel, which seemed to threaten the death of
their friendship; and yet what to all appearance thus severed them, was
perhaps the very thing that most closely bound them together; each
loved the other heartily; but each found passing satisfaction in being able
to discharge the most justly deserved reproaches upon his friend.
Emilius, a rich young man, of a susceptible and melancholy temperament,
on the death of his parents had become master of his fortune. He had set
out on a journey in order thereby to complete his education, but had now
already spent several months in a large town, for the sake of enjoying the
pleasures of the carnival, about which he never gave himself the least
trouble, and of making certain arrangements of importance about his
fortune with some relations, to whom as yet he had scarcely paid a visit.
On the road he had fallen in with the restless, ever-shifting and veering
Roderick, who was living at variance with his guardians, and who, to free 
himself wholly from them and their burdensome admonitions, eagerly
grasped at the opportunity held out to him by his new friend of becoming
his companion on his travels. During their journey they had often been on
the point of separating; but each after every dispute had only felt the
more clearly that he could not live without the other. Scarce had they left
their carriage in any town, when Roderick had already seen everything
remarkable in it, to forget it all again on the morrow; while Emilius took a
week to acquire a thorough knowledge of the place from his books, lest
he should omit seeing anything that was to be seen; and after all, from
indolence and indifference thought there was hardly anything worth his
while to go and look at. Roderick had immediately made a thousand
acquaintances, and visited every public place of entertainment; often too
he brought his new-made friends to the lonely chamber of Emilius, and
would then leave him alone with them, as soon as they began to tire him.
At other times he would confound the modest Emilius by extravagantly
praising his merits and his acquirements before intelligent and learned
men, and by giving them to understand how much they might learn from
his friend about languages, or antiquities, or the fine arts, although he
himself could never find time for listening to him on such subjects, when
the conversation happened to turn on them. But if Emilius ever chanced
to be in a more active mood, he might almost make sure of his truant
friend having caught cold the night before at a ball or a sledge-party, and
being forced to keep his bed; so that, with the liveliest, most restless, and
most communicative of men for his companion, Emilius lived in the
greatest solitude.
To-day he confidently expected him; for Roderick had been forced to give
him a solemn promise of spending the evening with him, in order to learn
what it was that for weeks had been depressing and agitating his
thoughtful friend. Meanwhile Emilius wrote down the following lines:
'Tis sweet when spring its choir assembles,
And every nightingale is steeping
The trees in his melodious weeping,
Till leaf and bloom with rapture trembles.
Fair is the net which moonlight weaves;
Fair are the breezes' gambolings,
As with lime-odours on their wings
They chase each other through the leaves.
Bright is the glory of the rose,
When Love's rich magic decks the earth,
From countless roses Love looks forth,
Those stars wherewith Love's heaven glows.
But sweeter, fairer, brighter far
To me that little lamp's pale gleaming,
When through the narrow casement streaming,
It bids me hail my evening star;
As from their braids her locks she flings,
Then twines them in a flowery band,
While at each motion of her hand
The white robe to her fair form clings;
Or when she breaks her lute's deep slumbers,
And as at morning's touch up-darting,
The notes, beneath her fingers starting,
Dance o'er the strings in playful numbers.
To stop their flight her voice she pours
Full after them; they laugh and fly,
And to my heart for refuge hie;
Her voice pursues them through its doors.
Leave me, ye fierce ones! hence remove!
They bar themselves within, and say,
'Till this be broken, here we stay,
That thou mayst know what 'tis to love.'
Emilius arose fretfully. It grew darker, and Roderick came not, and he
was wishing to tell him of his love for an unknown fair one, who dwelt in
the opposite house, and who kept him all day long at home, and waking 
through many a night. At length footsteps sounded up the stairs; the door
opened without anybody knocking at it, and in walked two gay masks
with ugly visages, one a Turk, dressed in red and blue silk, the other a
Spaniard in pale yellow and pink with many waving feathers on his hat.
As Emilius was becoming impatient, Roderick took off his mask, showed
his well-known laughing countenance, and said: 'Heyday, my good friend,
what a drowned puppy of a face! Is this the way to look in carnival time?
I and our dear young officer are come to fetch you away. There is a grand
ball to-night at the masquerade rooms; and as I know you have forsworn
ever going out in any other suit than that which you always wear, of the
devil's own colour, come with us as black as you are, for it is already
somewhat late.'
Emilius felt angry, and said: 'You have, it seems, according to custom,
altogether forgotten our agreement. I am extremely sorry,' he continued,
turning to the stranger, 'that I cannot possibly accompany you; my friend
has been over-hasty in promising for me; indeed I cannot go out at all,
having something of importance to talk to him about.'
The stranger, who was well-bred, and saw what Emilius meant, withdrew;
but Roderick, with the utmost indifference, put on his mask again, placed
himself before the glass, and said: 'Verily I am a hideous figure, am I
not? To say the truth, it is a tasteless, worthless, disgusting device.'
'That there can be no question about,' answered Emilius, in high
indignation. 'Making a caricature of yourself, and making a fool of
yourself, are among the pleasures you are always driving after at full
gallop.'
'Because you do not like dancing yourself,' said the other, 'and look upon
dancing as a mischievous invention, not a soul in the world must wear a
merry face. How tiresome it is, when a person is made up of nothing but
whims!'
'Doubtless!' replied his angry friend, 'and you give me ample opportunity
for finding that it is so. I thought after our agreement you would have
given me this evening; but----' 
'But it is the carnival, you know,' pursued the other, 'and all my
acquaintances and certain fair ladies are expecting me at the grand ball
to-night. Assure yourself, my good friend, it is mere disease in you that
makes you so unreasonable against all such matters.'
'Which of us has the fairest claim to disease,' said Emilius, 'I will not
examine. At least your inconceivable frivolousness, your hunger and thirst
after stop-gaps for every hour you are awake, your wild-goose chase
after pleasures that leave the heart empty, seem not to me altogether the
healthiest state of the soul. In certain things, at all events, you might
make a little allowance for my weakness, if it must once for all pass for
such: and there is nothing in the world that so jars through and through
me as a ball with its frightful music. Somebody once said, that to a deaf
person who cannot hear the music, a set of dancers must look like so
many patients for a mad-house; but, in my opinion, this dreadful music
itself, this twirling and whirling and pirouetting of half a dozen notes, each
treading on its own heels, in those accursed tunes which ram themselves
into our memories, yea, I might say, mix themselves up with our very
blood, so that one cannot get rid of their taint for many a miserable day
after--this to me is the very trance of madness; and if I could ever bring
myself to think dancing endurable, it must be dancing to the tune of
silence.'
'Well done, signor Paradox-monger!' exclaimed the mask. 'Why, you are
so far gone, that you think the most natural, most innocent, and merriest
thing in the world unnatural, ay, and shocking.'
'I cannot change my feelings,' said his grave friend. 'From my very
childhood these tunes have made me wretched, and have often well-nigh
driven me out of my senses. They are to me the ghosts and spectres and
furies in the world of sound, and come thus and buzz round my head, and
grin at me with horrid laughter.'
'All nervous irritability!' returned the other; 'just like your extravagant
abhorrence of spiders and many other harmless insects.'
'Harmless you call them,' cried Emilius, now quite untuned, 'because you
have no repugnance toward them. To one, however, who feels the same 
disgust and loathing, the same nameless horror, that I feel, rise up in his
soul and shoot through his whole being at the sight of them, these
miscreate deformities, such as toads, spiders, or that most loathsome of
nature's excrements, the bat, are not indifferent or insignificant: their
very existence is directly at enmity and wages war with his. In truth, one
might smile at the unbelievers whose imagination is too barren for ghosts
and fearful spectres, and those births of night which we see in sickness,
to take root therein, or who stare and marvel at Dante's descriptions,
when the commonest every-day life brings before our eyes such frightful
distorted master-pieces among the works of horror. Yet, can we really
and faithfully love the beautiful, without being stricken with pain at the
sight of such monstrosities?'
'Wherefore stricken with pain?' asked Roderick. 'Why should the great
realm of the waters and the seas present us with nothing but those
terrors which you have accustomed yourself to find there? Why not rather
look on such creatures as strange, entertaining, and ludicrous mummers,
and on the whole region in the light of a great masked ball-room? But
your whims go still further; for as you love roses with a kind of idolatry,
there are many flowers for which you have a no less vehement hatred:
yet what harm has the dear good tulip ever done you, or all the other
dutiful children of summer that you persecute? So again you have an
aversion to many colours, to many scents, and to many thoughts; and
you take no pains to harden yourself against these weaknesses, but yield
to them and sink down into them as into a luxurious feather-bed; and I
often fear I shall lose you altogether some day, and find nothing but a
patchwork of whims and prejudices sitting at that table instead of my
Emilius.'
Emilius was wrath to the bottom of his heart, and answered not a word.
He had long given up all design of making his intended confession; nor
did the thoughtless Roderick show the least wish to hear the secret which
his melancholy friend had announced to him with such an air of
solemnity. He sat carelessly in the arm-chair, playing with his mask, when
he suddenly cried: 'Be so kind, Emilius, as to lend me your large cloak.'
'What for?' asked the other. 
'I hear music in the church on the opposite side of the street,' answered
Roderick, 'and this hour has hitherto escaped me every evening since we
have been here. To-day it comes just as if called for. I can hide my dress
under your cloak, which will also cover my mask and turban, and when it
is over I can go straight to the ball.'
Emilius muttered between his teeth as he looked in the wardrobe for his
cloak, then constraining himself to an ironical smile, gave it to Roderick,
who was already on his legs. 'There is my Turkish dagger which I bought
yesterday,' said the mask, as he wrapped himself up; 'put it by for me; it
is a bad habit carrying about toys of cold steel: one can never tell what ill
use may be made of them, should a quarrel arise, or any other knot
which it is easier to cut than to untie. We meet again to-morrow;
farewell; a pleasant evening to you.' He waited for no reply, but hastened
down-stairs.
When Emilius was alone, he tried to forget his anger, and to fix his
attention on the laughable side of his friend's behaviour. After a while his
eyes rested upon the shining, finely-wrought dagger, and he said: 'What
must be the feelings of a man who could thrust this sharp iron into the
breast of an enemy! but oh, what must be those of one who could hurt a
beloved object with it! He locked it up, then gently folded back the
shutters of his window, and looked across the narrow street. But no light
was there; all was dark in the opposite house; the dear form that dwelt in
it, and that used about this time to show herself at her household
occupations, seemed to be absent. 'Perhaps she is at the ball,' thought
Emilius, little as it suited her retired way of life.
Suddenly, however, a light entered; the little girl whom his beloved
unknown had about her, and with whom, during the day and evening, she
busied herself in various ways, carried a candle through the room, and
closed the window-shutters. An opening remained light, large enough for
over-looking a part of the little chamber from the spot where Emilius
stood; and there the happy youth would often bide till after midnight,
fixed as though he had been charmed there. He was full of gladness when
he saw her teaching the child to read, or instructing her in sewing and
knitting. Upon inquiry he had learnt that the little girl was a poor orphan
whom his fair maiden had charitably taken into the house to educate her. 
Emilius's friends could not conceive why he lived in this narrow street, in
this comfortless lodging, why he was so little to be seen in society, or how
he employed himself. Without employment, in solitude he was happy:
only he felt angry with himself and his own timidity and shyness, which
kept him from venturing to seek a nearer acquaintance with this fair
being, notwithstanding the friendliness with which on many occasions she
had greeted and thanked him. He knew not that she would often bend
over him eyes no less love-sick than his own; nor boded what wishes
were forming in her heart, of what an effort, of what a sacrifice she felt
herself capable, so she might but attain to the possession of his love.
After walking a few times up and down the room, when the light had
departed with the child, he suddenly resolved upon going to the ball,
though it was so against his inclination and his nature; for it struck him
that his Unknown might have made an exception to her quiet mode of
life, in order for once to enjoy the world, and its gaieties. The streets
were brilliantly lighted up, the snow crackled under his feet, carriages
rolled by, and masks in every variety of dress whistled and chirped as
they passed him. From many a house there sounded the dancing-music
he so abhorred, and he could not bring himself to go the nearest way
towards the ball-room, whither people from every direction were
streaming and thronging. He walked round the old church, gazed at its
lofty tower rising solemnly into the dark sky, and felt gladdened by the
stillness and loneliness of the remote square. Within the recess of a large
door-way, the varied sculptures of which he had always contemplated
with pleasure, recollecting, while so engaged, the olden times and the
arts which adorned them, he now again paused, to give himself up for a
few moments to his thoughts. He had not stood long, before a figure drew
his attention, which kept restlessly walking to and fro, and seemed to be
waiting for somebody. By the light of a lamp that was burning before an
image of the Virgin, he clearly distinguished its features as well as its
strange garb. It was an old woman of the uttermost hideousness, which
struck the eye the more from being brought out by its extravagant
contrast with a scarlet bodice embroidered with gold; the gown she wore
was dark, and the cap on her head shone likewise with gold. Emilius
fancied at first it must be some tasteless mask that had strayed there by
mistake; but he was soon convinced by the clear light that the old, brown,
wrinkled face was one of Nature's ploughing, and no mimic exaggeration. 
Many minutes had not passed when there appeared two men, wrapped up
in cloaks, who seemed to approach the spot with cautions footsteps, often
looking about them, as if to observe whether anybody was following. The
old woman walked up to them. 'Have you got the candles?' asked she
hastily, and with a gruff voice. 'Here they are,' said one of the men; 'you
know the price; let the matter be settled forthwith.' The old woman
seemed to be giving him money, which he counted over beneath his
cloak. 'I rely upon you,' she again began, 'that they are made exactly
according to the prescription, at the right time and place, so that the work
cannot fail.' 'Feel safe as to that,' returned the man, and walked rapidly
away. The other, who remained behind, was a youth: he took the old
woman by the hand, and said: 'Can it then be, Alexia, that such rites and
forms of words, as those old stories, in which I never could put faith, tell
us, can fetter the free will of man, and make love and hatred grow in the
heart?' 'So it is,' answered the scarlet woman; 'but one and one must
make two, and many a one must be added thereto, before such things
come to pass. It is not these candles alone, moulded beneath the
midnight darkness of the new moon, and drenched with human blood, it
is not the muttering magical words and invocations alone, that can give
you the mastery over the soul of another; much more than this belongs
to such works; but it is all known to the initiated.' 'I rely on you then,'
said the stranger. 'To-morrow after midnight I am at your service,'
returned the old woman. 'You shall not be the first person that ever was
dissatisfied with the tidings I brought him. To-night, as you have heard, I
have some one else in hand, one whose senses and understanding our art
shall twist about whichever way we choose, as easily as I twist this hair
out of my head.' These last words she uttered with a half grin: they now
separated, and withdrew in different directions.
Emilius came from the dark niche shuddering, and raised his looks upon
the image of the Virgin with the Child. 'Before thine eyes, thou mild and
blessed one,' said he, half aloud, 'are these miscreants daring to hold
their market, and trafficking in their hellish drugs. But as thou embracest
thy Child with thy love, even so doth the unseen Love hold us all in its
protecting arms, and we feel their touch, and our poor hearts beat in joy
and in trembling toward a greater heart that will never forsake us.' 
Clouds were wandering along over the pinnacles of the tower and the
steep roof of the church; the everlasting stars looked down from amongst
them, sparkling with mild serenity; and Emilius turned his thoughts
resolutely away from these nightly horrors, and thought upon the beauty
of his Unknown. He again entered the living streets, and bent his steps
toward the brightly illuminated ball-room, whence voices, and the rattling
of carriages, and now and then, between the pauses, the clamorous
music came sounding to his ears.
In the hall he was instantly lost amid the streaming throng; dancers
sprang round him, masks shot by him to and fro, kettle-drums and
trumpets deafened his ears, and it was unto him as though human life
were nothing but a dream. He walked along the lines; his eye alone was
watchful, seeking for those beloved eyes and that fair head with its brown
locks, for the sight of which he yearned to-day even more intensely than
at other times; and yet he inwardly reproached the adored being for
enduring to plunge into and lose itself in such a stormy sea of confusion
and folly. 'No,' said he to himself, 'no heart that loves can lay itself open
to this waste hubbub of noise, in which every longing and every tear of
love is scoffed and mocked at by the pealing laughter of wild trumpets.
The whispering of trees, the murmuring of fountains, harp-tones, and
gentle song gushing forth from an overflowing bosom, are the sounds in
which love abides. But this is the very thundering and shouting of hell in
the trance of its despair.'
He found not what he was seeking; for the belief that her beloved face
might perchance be lying hid behind some odious mask was what he
could not possibly bring himself to. Thrice already had he ranged up and
down the hall, and had vainly passed in array every sitting and unmasked
female, when the Spaniard joined him and said: 'I am glad that after all
you are come. You seem to be looking for your friend.'
Emilius had quite forgotten him: he said, however, in some confusion:
'Indeed I wonder at not having met him here; his mask is easily known.'
'Can you guess what the strange fellow is about?' answered the young
officer. 'He did not dance, or even remain half an hour in the ball-room;
for he soon met with his friend Anderson, who is just come from the 
country. Their conversation fell upon literature. As Anderson had not yet
seen the new poem, Roderick would not rest till they had opened one of
the back rooms for him; and there he now is, sitting with his companion
beside a solitary taper, and declaiming the whole poem to him, beginning
with the invocation to the Muse.'
'It is just like him,' said Emilius; 'he is always the child of the moment. I
have done all in my power, not even shunning some amicable quarrels, to
break him of this habit of always living extempore, and playing away his
whole being in impromptus, card after card, as it happens to turn up,
without once looking through his hand. But these follies have taken such
deep root in his heart, he would sooner part with his best friend than with
them. That very same poem, of which he is so fond that he always carries
a copy of it in his pocket, he was desirous of reading to me, and I had
even urgently entreated him to do so; but we were scarcely over the first
description of the moon, when, just as I was resigning myself to an
enjoyment of its beauties, he suddenly jumped up, ran off, came back
with the cook's apron round his waist, tore down the bell-rope in ringing
to have the fire lighted, and insisted on dressing me some beef-steaks,
for which I had not the least appetite, and of which he fancies himself the
best cook in Europe, though, if he is lucky, he spoils them only nine times
out of ten.'
The Spaniard laughed, and asked: 'Has he never been in love?'
'In his way,' replied Emilius very gravely; 'as if he were making game
both of love and of himself, with a dozen women at a time, and, if you
would believe his words, raving after every one of them; but ere a week
passes over his head they are all sponged out of it together, and not even
a blot of them remains.'
They parted in the crowd, and Emilius walked toward the remote
apartment, whence already from afar he heard his friend's loud recitative.
'Ah, so you are here too,' cried Roderick, as he entered; 'that is just what
it should be. I have got to the very passage at which we broke down the
other day; seat yourself, and you may listen to the rest.' 
'I am not in a humour for it now,' said Emilius; 'besides, the room and the
hour do not seem to me altogether fitted for such an employment.'
'And why not?' answered Roderick. 'Time and place are made for us, and
not we for time and place. Is not good poetry as good at one place as at
another? Or would you prefer dancing? there is scarcity of men; and with
the help of nothing more than a few hours' jumping and a pair of tired
legs, you may lay strong siege to the hearts of as many grateful beauties
as you please.'
'Good-bye!' cried the other, already in the door-way; 'I am going home.'
Roderick called after him: 'Only one word! I set off with this gentleman at
daybreak to-morrow, to spend a few days in the country, but will look in
upon you to take leave before we start. Should you be asleep, as is most
likely, do not take the trouble of waking; for in a couple of days I shall be
with you again.--The strangest being on earth!' he continued, turning to
his new friend, 'so moping and fretful and gloomy, that he turns all his
pleasures sour; or rather there is no such thing as pleasure for him.
Instead of walking about with his fellow-creatures in broad daylight and
enjoying himself, he gets down to the bottom of the well of his thoughts,
for the sake of now and then having a glimpse of a star. Everything must
be in the superlative for him; everything must be pure and noble and
celestial; his heart must be always heaving and throbbing, even when he
is standing before a puppet-show. He never laughs or cries, but can only
smile and weep; and there is mighty little difference between his weeping
and his smiling. When anything, be it what you will, falls short of his
anticipations and preconceptions, which are always flying up out of reach
and sight, he puts on a tragical face, and complains that it is a base and
soulless world. At this moment, I doubt not, he is exacting, that under the
masks of a Pantaloon and a Pulcinello there should be a heart glowing
with unearthly desires and ideal aspirations, and that Harlequin should
out moralise Hamlet upon the nothingness of sublunary things; and
should it not be so, the dew will rise into his eyes, and he will turn his
back on the whole scene with desponding contempt.'
'He must be melancholic then?' asked his hearer. 
'Not that exactly,' answered Roderick. 'He has only been spoilt by his
over-fond parents, and by himself. He has accustomed himself to let his
heart ebb and flow as regularly as the sea, and if this motion ever
chances to intermit, he cries out _miracle!_ and would offer a prize to the
genius that can satisfactorily explain so marvellous a phenomenon. He is
the best fellow under the sun; but all my painstaking to break him of this
perverseness is utterly vain and thrown away; and if I would not earn
sorry thanks for my good intentions, I must even let him follow his own
course.'
'He seems to need a physician,' remarked Anderson.
'It is one of his whims,' said Roderick, 'to entertain a supreme contempt
for the whole medical art. He will have it that every disease is something
different and distinct in every patient, that it can be brought under no
class, and that it is absurd to think of healing it, either by attention to
ancient practice or by what is called theory. Indeed he would much rather
apply to an old woman, and make use of sympathetic cures. On the same
principle, he despises all foresight, on whatever occasion, as well as
everything like regularity, moderation, and common sense. The last
above all he holds in especial abhorrence, as the antipodes and archenemy of all enthusiasm. From his very childhood he framed for himself
an ideal of a noble character; and his highest aim is to render himself
what he considers such, that is, a being who shows his superiority to all
things earthy by his contempt for gold. Merely in order that he may not
be suspected of being parsimonious, or giving unwillingly, or ever talking
about money, he tosses it about him right and left by handfuls; with all
his large income is for ever poor and distressed, and becomes the fool of
everybody not endowed with precisely the same kind of magnanimity,
which for himself he is determined that he will have. To be his friend is
the undertaking of all undertakings; for he is so irritable, one need only
cough or eat with one's knife, or even pick one's teeth, to offend him
mortally.'
'Was he never in love?' asked his country friend.
'Whom should he love? whom could he love?' answered Roderick. 'He
scorns all the daughters of earth; and were he ever to suspect that his 
beloved had not an angelical contempt for dress, or liked dancing as well
as star-gazing, it would break his heart; still more appalling would it be, if
she were ever so unfortunate as to sneeze.'
Meanwhile Emilius was again standing amid the throng; but suddenly
there came over him that uneasiness, that shivering, which had already
so often seized his heart when among a crowd in a state of similar
excitement; it chased him out of the ball-room and house, down along the
deserted streets; nor, till he reached his lonely chamber, did he recover
himself and the quiet possession of his senses. The night-light was
already kindled; he sent his servant to bed; everything in the opposite
house was silent and dark; and he sat down to pour forth in verse the
feelings which had been aroused by the ball.
Within the heart 'tis still;
Sleep each wild thought encages;
Now stirs a wicked will,
Would see how madness rages.
And cries, Wild Spirit, awake!
Loud cymbals catch the cry
And back its echoes shake;
And shouting peals of laughter,
The trumpet rushes after,
And cries, Wild Spirit, awake!
Amidst them flute tones fly,
Like arrows keen and numberless;
And with bloodhound yell
Pipes the onset swell;
And violins and violoncellos,
Creeking, clattering,
Shrieking and shattering;
And horns whence thunder bellows;
To leave the victim slumberless,
And drag forth prisoned madness,
And cruelly murder all quiet and innocent gladness.
What will be the end of this commotion?
Where the shore to this turmoiling ocean?
What seeks the tossing throng,
As it wheels and whirls along?
On! on! the lustres
Like hell-stars bicker:
Let us twine in closer clusters.
On! on! ever thicker and quicker!
How the silly things throb, throb amain!
Hence, all quiet!
Hither, riot!
Peal more proudly,
Squeal more loudly,
Ye cymbals, ye trumpets! Be-dull all pain,
Till it laugh again.
Thou becomest to me, beauty's daughter;
Smiles ripple over thy lips,
And o'er thine eyes blue water;
O let me breathe on thee,
Ere parted hence we flee.
Ere aught that light eclipse.
I know that beauty's flowers soon wither;
Those lips within whose rosy cells
Thy spirit warbles its sweet spells,
Death's clammy kiss ere long will press together.
I know, that face so fair and full
Is but a masquerading skull;
But hail to thee, skull so fair and so fresh!
Why should I weep and whine and wail,
That what blooms now must soon grow pale,
That worms must feed on that sweet flesh?
Let me laugh but to-day and to-morrow,
And I care not for sorrow,
While thus on the waves of the dance by each other we sail!
Now thou art mine
And I am thine:
And what though pain and sorrow wait
To seize thee at the gate,
And sob and tear and groan and sigh
Stand ranged in state
On thee to fly;
Blithely let us look and cheerily
On death, that grins so drearily.
What would grief with us, or anguish?
They are foes that we know how to vanquish.
I press thine answering fingers,
Thy look upon me lingers,
Or the fringe of thy garment will waft me a kiss:
Thou rollest on in light;
I fall back into night;
Even despair is bliss.
From this delight,
From this wild laughter's surge,
Perchance there may emerge
Foul jealousy and scorn and spite.
But this our glory! and pride!
When thee I despise,
I turn but mine eyes,
And the fair one beside thee will welcome my gaze;
And she is my bride;
Oh, happy, happy days!
Or shall it be her neighbour,
Whose eyes like a sabre
Flash and pierce,
Their glance is so fierce?
Thus capering and prancing,
All together go dancing
Adown life's giddy cave;
Nor living nor loving,
But dizzily roving
Through dreams to a grave.
There below 'tis yet worse;
Its flowers and its clay
Roof a gloomier day,
Hide a still deeper curse.
Ring then, ye cymbals, enliven this dream!
Ye horns, shout a fiercer, more vulture-like scream!
And jump, caper, leap, prance, dance yourselves out of breath!
For your life is all art;
Love has given you no heart:
Therefore shout till ye plunge into bottomless death.
He had ended and was standing at the window. Then came she into the
opposite chamber, lovely, as he had never yet seen her; her brown hair
floated freely and played in wanton ringlets about the whitest of necks;
she was but lightly clad, and it seemed as though she was about to finish
some household task at this late hour of the night before going to bed;
for she placed two lights in two corners of the room, set to rights the
green baize on the table, and again retired. Emilius was still sunk in his
sweet dreams, and gazing on the image which his beloved had left on his
mind, when to his horror the fearful, the scarlet old woman walked
through the chamber; the gold on her head and breast glared ghastlily as
it threw back the light. She had vanished again. Was he to believe his
eyes? Was it not some blinding deception of the night, some spectre that
his own feverish imagination had conjured up before him? But no! she
returned still more hideous than before, with a long gray-and-black mane
flying wildly and ruggedly about her breast and back. The fair maiden
followed her, pale, frozen up; her lovely bosom was without a covering;
but the whole form was like a marble statue. Betwixt them they led the
little sweet child, weeping and clinging entreatingly to the fair maiden,
who looked not down upon it. The child clasped and lifted up its little
beseeching hands, and stroked the pale neck and cheeks of the marble
beauty. But she held it fast by the hair, and in the other hand a silver
basin. Then the old woman gave a growl, and pulled out a long knife, and
drew it across the white neck of the child. Here something wound forth
from behind them, which they seemed not to perceive; or it must have
produced in them the same deep horror as in Emilius. The ghastly neck of
a serpent curled forth, scale after scale, lengthening and ever lengthening
out of the darkness, and stooped down between them over the child,
whose lifeless limbs hung from the old woman's arms; its black tongue
licked up the spirting red blood, and a green sparkling eye shot over into 
Emilius's eye, and brain, and heart, so that he fell at the same instant to
the ground.
He was senseless when found by Roderick some hours after.
* * * * *
A party of friends was sitting, on the brightest summer morning, in a
green arbour, assembled round an excellent breakfast. Laughter and jests
passed round, and many a time did the glasses kiss with a merry health
to the youthful couple, and a wish that they might be the happiest of the
happy. The bride and bridegroom were not present; the fair one being still
busied about her dress, while the young husband was sauntering alone in
a distant avenue, musing upon his happiness.
'What a pity,' said Anderson, 'that we are to have no music. All our ladies
are beclouded at the thought, and never in their whole lives longed for a
dance so much as to-day, when to have one is quite out of the question.
It is far too painful to his feelings.'
'I can tell you a secret though,' said a young officer; 'which is, that we are
to have a dance after all, and a rare madcap and riotous one it will he.
Everything is already arranged; the musicians are come secretly, and
quartered out of sight. Roderick has managed it all; for he says, one
ought not to let him have his own way, or to humour his strange
prejudices over-much, especially on such a day as this. Besides, he is
already grown far more like a human being, and is much more sociable
than he used to be; so that I think even he will not dislike this alteration.
Indeed, the whole wedding has been brought about all of a sudden, in a
way that nobody could have expected.'
'His whole life,' said Anderson, 'is no less singular than his character. You
must all remember how, being engaged on his travels, he arrived last
autumn in our city, fixed himself there for the winter, lived like a
melancholy man, scarcely ever leaving his room, and never gave himself
the least trouble about our theatre or any other amusement. He almost
quarrelled with Roderick, his most intimate friend, for trying to divert him,
and not pampering him in all his moping humours. In fact, this 
exaggerated irritability and moodiness must have been a disease that was
gathering in his body; for, as you know, he was seized four months since
with a most violent nervous fever, so that we were all forced to give him
up for lost. After his fancies had raved themselves out, on returning to his
senses, he had almost entirely lost his memory; his childhood, indeed,
and his early youth were still present to his mind, but he could not
recollect anything that had occurred during his travels, or immediately
before his illness. He was forced to begin anew his acquaintance with all
his friends, even with Roderick; and only by little and little has it grown
lighter with him; but slowly has the past with all that had befallen him
come again, though still in dim colours, over his memory. He had been
removed into his uncle's house, that the better care might be taken of
him, and he was like a child, letting them do with him whatever they
chose. The first time he went out to enjoy the warmth of spring in the
park, he saw a girl sitting thoughtfully by the road-side. She looked up;
her eye met his; and, as it were seized with an unaccountable yearning,
he bade the carriage stop, got out, sat down by her, took hold of her
hands, and poured himself forth in a full stream of tears. His friends were
again alarmed for his understanding; but he grew tranquil, lively and
conversable, got introduced to the girl's parents, and at the very first
besought her hand; which, as her parents did not refuse their consent,
she granted him. Thenceforward he was happy, and a new life sprang up
within him; every day he became healthier and more cheerful. A week
ago he visited me at this country-seat of mine, and was above measure
delighted with it; indeed so much so that he would not rest till he had
made me sell it to him. I might easily have turned his passionate wish to
my own good account, and to his injury; for, whenever he sets his heart
on a thing, he will have it, and that forthwith. He immediately made his
arrangements, and had furniture brought hither that he may spend the
summer months here; and in this way it has come to pass that we are all
now assembled together to celebrate our friend's marriage at this villa,
which a few days since belonged to me.'
The house was large, and situated in a very lovely country. One side
looked down upon a river, and beyond it upon pleasant hills, clad and girt
round with shrubs and trees of various kinds; immediately before it lay a
beautiful flower-garden. Here the orange and lemon trees were ranged in
a large open hall, from which small doors led to the store-rooms and 
cellars, and pantries. On the other side spread the green plain of a
meadow, which was immediately bordered by a large park; here the two
long wings of the house formed a spacious court; and three broad, open
galleries, supported by rows of pillars standing above each other,
connected all the apartments in the building, which gave it on this side an
interesting and singular character; for figures were continually moving
along these arcades in the discharge of their various household tasks;
new forms kept stepping forth between the pillars and out of every room,
which reappeared soon after above or below, to be lost behind some
other doors; the company too would often assemble there for tea or for
play; and thus, when seen from below, the whole had the look of a
theatre, before which everybody would gladly pause awhile, expecting, as
his fancies wandered, that something strange or pleasing would soon be
taking place above.
The party of young people were just rising, when the full-dressed bride
came through the garden and walked up to them. She was clad in violetcoloured velvet; a sparkling necklace lay cradled on her white neck; the
costly lace just allowed her swelling bosom to glimmer through; her
brown hair was tinged yet more beautifully by its wreath of myrtles and
white roses. She addressed each in turn with a kind greeting, and the
young men were astonished at her surpassing beauty. She had been
gathering flowers in the garden, and was now returning into the house, to
see after the preparations for the dinner. The tables had been placed in
the lower open gallery, and shone dazzlingly with their white coverings
and their load of sparkling crystal; rich clusters of many-coloured flowers
rose from the graceful necks of alabaster vases; green garlands, starred
with white blossoms, twined round the columns; and it was a lovely sight
to behold the bride gliding along with gentle motion between the tables
and the pillars, amid the light of the flowers, overlooking the whole with a
searching glance, then vanishing, and re-appearing a moment afterwards
higher up to pass into her chamber.
'She is the loveliest and most enchanting creature I ever saw,' cried
Anderson; 'our friend is indeed the happiest of men.'
'Even her paleness,' said the officer, taking up the word, 'heightens her
beauty. Her brown eyes sparkle only more intensely above those white 
cheeks, and beneath those dark locks; and the singular, almost burning,
redness of her lips gives a truly magical appearance to her face.'
'The air of silent melancholy that surrounds her,' said Anderson, 'sheds a
lofty majesty over her whole form.'
The bridegroom joined them, and inquired after Roderick. They had all
missed him some time since, and could not conceive where he could be
tarrying; and they all set out in search of him. 'He is below in the hall,'
said at length a young man whom they happened to ask, 'in the midst of
the coachmen, footmen, and grooms, showing off tricks at cards, which
they cannot grow tired of staring at.' They went in, and interrupted the
noisy admiration of the servants, without, however, disturbing Roderick,
who quietly pursued his conjuring exhibition. When he had finished, he
walked with the others into the garden, and said, 'I do it only to
strengthen the fellows in their faith: for these puzzles give a hard blow to
their groomships' free-thinking inclinations, and help to make them true
believers.'
'I see,' said the bridegroom, 'my all-sufficing friend, among his other
talents, does not think that of a mountebank beneath his cultivation.'
'We live in a strange time,' replied the other. 'Who knows whether
mountebanks may not come to rule the roost in their turn. One ought to
despise nothing nowadays: the veriest straw of talent may be that which
is to break the camel's back.'
When the two friends found themselves alone, Emilius again turned down
the dark avenue, and said, 'Why am I in such a gloomy mood on this the
happiest day of my life? But I assure you, Roderick, little as you will
believe it, I am not made for this moving about among such a mob of
human beings; for this keeping my attention on the _qui vive_ for every
letter of the alphabet, so that neither A nor Z may go without all fitting
respect; for this making a bow to her tenth, and shaking hands with my
twentieth; for this rendering of formal homage to her parents; for this
handing a flower from my nosegay of compliments to every lady that
crosses my eye; for this waiting to receive the tide of newcomers as wave
after wave rushes over me, and then turning to give orders that their 
servants and horses may have each a full trough and pail set before
them.'
'That is a watch that goes of its own accord,' answered Roderick. 'Only
look at your house, it was just built for such an occasion; and your headbutler, with his right hand taking up at the same time that his left is
setting down, and one leg running north while the other seems to be
making for south, was begotten and born for no other end than to put
confusion in order. He would even set my brains to rights if he could get
at them; were the whole city here he would find room for all; and he will
make your hospitality the proverb of fifty miles round. Leave all such
things to him and to your lovely bride; and where will you find so sweet a
lightener of this world's cares?'
'This morning before sunrise,' said Emilius, 'I was walking through the
wood; my thoughts were solemnly tuned, and I felt to the bottom of my
soul that my life was now receiving its determinate character, that it was
become a serious thing, and that this passion had created for me a home
and a calling. I passed along by that arbour there, and heard sounds: it
was my beloved in close conversation. "Has it not turned out now as I told
you?" said a strange voice; "just as I knew it must turn out. You have got
your wish, so cheer up and be merry." I would not go near them;
afterwards I walked toward the arbour, but they had both already left it.
Since then I keep thinking and thinking, what can these words mean?'
Roderick answered: 'Perhaps she may have been in love with you for
some time without your knowing it; you are only so much the happier.'
A late nightingale here upraised her song, and seemed to be wishing the
lover health and bliss. Emilius became more thoughtful. 'Come down with
me, to cheer up your spirits,' said Roderick, 'down to the village, where
you will find another couple; for you must not fancy that yours is the only
wedding on which to-day's sun is to shine. A young clown, finding his
time wear heavily in the house with an ugly old maid, for want of
something better to do, did what makes the booby now think himself
bound in honour to transform her into his wife. By this time they must
both be already dressed, so let us not miss the sight; for doubtless, it will
be a most interesting wedding.' 
The melancholy man let himself be dragged along by his lively chattering
friend, and they soon came to the cottage. The procession was just
sallying forth, to go to the church. The young countryman was in his usual
linen frock; all his finery consisted in a pair of leather breeches, which he
had polished till they shone like a field of dandelions; he was of simple
mien, and appeared somewhat confused. The bride was sun-burnt, with
but a few farewell leaves of youth still hanging about her; she was
coarsely and poorly, but cleanly dressed; some red and blue silk ribbons,
already a good deal faded; but what chiefly disfigured her was, that her
hair, stiffened with lard, flour, and pins, had been swept back from her
forehead, and piled up at the top of her head in a mound, on the summit
of which lay the bridal chaplet. She smiled and seemed glad at heart, but
was shamefaced and downcast. Next came the aged parents; the father
too was only a servant about the farm, and the hovel, the furniture, and
the clothing, all bore witness that their poverty was extreme. A dirty,
squinting musician followed the train, who kept grinning and screaming,
and scratching his fiddle, which was patched together of wood and
pasteboard, and instead of strings had three bits of pack-thread. The
procession halted when his honour, their new master, came up to them.
Some mischief-loving servants, young lads and girls, tittered and
laughed, and jeered the bridal couple, especially the ladies' maids, who
thought themselves far handsomer, and saw themselves infinitely better
clad, and wondered how people could be so vulgar. A shuddering came
over Emilius; he looked round for Roderick, but the latter had already run
away from him again. An impertinent coxcomb, with a head pilloried in his
high starched neck-cloth, a servant to one of the visitors, eager to show
his wit, pressed up to Emilius, giggling, and cried: 'Now, your honour,
what says your honour to this grand couple? They can neither of them
guess where they are to find bread for to-morrow, and yet they mean to
give a ball this afternoon, and that famous performer there is already
engaged.' 'No bread!' said Emilius; 'can such things be?' 'Their
wretchedness,' continued the chatterbox, 'is known to the whole
neighbourhood; but the fellow says he bears the creature the same goodwill, although she is such a sorry bit of clay. Ay, verily, as the song says,
love can make black white! The couple of baggages have not even a bed,
and must pass their wedding night on the straw. They have just been
round to every house begging a pint of small beer, with which they mean 
to get drunk; a royal treat for a wedding day, your honour!' Everybody
round about laughed loudly, and the unhappy, despised pair cast down
their eyes. Emilius indignantly pushed the chatterer away. 'Here, take
this!' he cried, and threw a hundred ducats, which he had received that
morning, into the hands of the amazed bridegroom. The betrothed couple
and their parents wept aloud, threw themselves clumsily on their knees,
and kissed his hands and the skirts of his coat. He tried to make his
escape. 'Let that keep hunger out of your doors as long as it lasts!' he
exclaimed, quite stunned by his feelings. 'Oh!' they all screamed, 'oh,
your honour! we shall be rich and happy till the day of our deaths, and
longer too, if we live longer.'
He knew not how he got away from them; but he found himself alone,
and hastened with unsteady steps into the wood. Here he sought out the
thickest, loneliest spot, and threw himself down on a grassy knoll, no
longer keeping back the bursting stream of his tears. 'I am sick of life,' he
sobbed; 'I cannot be glad and happy, I will not. Make haste and receive
me, thou dear kind earth, and hide me in thy cool, refreshing arms from
the wild beasts that tread over thee and call themselves men. Oh, God in
heaven! how have I deserved that I should rest upon down and wear silk,
that the grape should pour forth her most precious blood for me, and that
all should throng around me and offer me their homage and love? This
poor wretch is better and worthier than I, and misery is his nurse, and
mockery and venomous scorn are the only sounds that hail his wedding.
Every delicacy that is placed before me, every draught out of my costly
goblets, my lying on soft beds, my wearing gold and rich garments, will
be unto me like so many sins, now that I have beheld how the world
hunts down many thousand thousand wretches, who are hungering after
the dry bread that I throw away, and who never know what a good meal
is. Oh, now I can fully understand your feelings, ye holy pious, whom the
world despises and scorns and scoffs at, who scatter abroad your all, even
unto the raiment of your poverty, and did gird sack-cloth about your
loins, and did resolve as beggars to endure the gibes and the kicks
wherewith brutal insolence and swilling voluptuousness drive away misery
from their tables, that by so doing ye might thoroughly purge yourselves
from the foul sin of wealth.' 
The world, with all its forms of being, hung in a mist before his eyes; he
determined to look upon the destitute as his brethren, and to depart far
away from the communion of the happy. They had already been waiting
for him a long time in the hall, to perform the ceremony; the bride had
become uneasy; her parents had gone in search of him through the
garden and park; at length he returned, lighter for having wept away his
cares, and the solemn knot was tied.
The company then walked from the lower hall toward the open gallery, to
seat themselves at table. The bride and bridegroom led the way, and the
rest followed in their train. Roderick offered his arm to a young girl who
was gay and talkative. 'Why does a bride always cry, and look so sad and
serious during the ceremony,' said she, as they mounted the steps.
'Because it is the first moment in which she feels intensely all the weight
and meaning and mystery of life,' answered Roderick.
'But our bride,' continued the girl, 'far surpasses in gravity all I have ever
yet seen. Indeed, she almost always looks melancholy, and one can never
catch her in a downright hearty laugh.'
'This does more honour to her heart,' answered Roderick, himself,
contrary to custom, feeling somewhat seriously disposed. 'You know not,
perhaps, that the bride a few years ago took a lovely little orphan girl into
the house, to educate her. All her time was devoted to the child, and the
love of this gentle being was her sweetest reward. The girl was become
seven years old, when she was lost during a walk through the town, and
in spite of all the means that have been employed, nobody could ever find
out what became of her. Our noble-minded hostess has taken this
misfortune so much to heart that she has been preyed upon ever since by
a silent melancholy, nor can anything win her away from her longing after
her little play-fellow.'
'A most interesting adventure, indeed,' said the lady. 'One might see a
whole romance in three volumes grow out of this seed. It will be a
strange sight, and it will not be for nothing, when this lost star reappears.
What a pretty poem it would make! Don't you think so, sir?' 
The party arranged themselves at table. The bride and bridegroom sat in
the centre, and looked out upon the gay landscape. They talked and
drank healths, and the most cheerful humour reigned; the bride's parents
were quite happy; the bridegroom alone was reserved and thoughtful, eat
but little, and took no part in the conversation. He started when some
musical sounds rolled down from above, but grew calm again on finding it
was nothing but the soft notes of a bugle, which wandered along with a
pleasant murmur over the shrubs and through the park, till they died
away on the distant hills. Roderick had stationed the musicians in the
gallery overhead, and Emilius was satisfied with this arrangement.
Toward the end of the dinner he called his butler, and turning to his bride,
said, 'My love, let poverty also have a share of our superfluities.' He then
ordered him to send several bottles of wine, some pastry, and other
dishes in abundant portions, to the poor couple, so that with them also
this day might be a day of rejoicing, unto which in after-times they might
look back with delight. 'See, my friend,' cried Roderick, 'how beautifully
all things in this world hang together. My idle trick of busying myself
about other people's concerns, and my chattering, though you are for
ever finding fault with them, have after all been the occasion of this good
deed.' Several persons began making pretty speeches to their host on his
compassion and kind heart, and the young lady next to Roderick lisped
about romantic feelings and sentimental magnanimity. 'O, hold your
tongues,' cried Emilius indignantly. 'This is no good action; it is no action
at all; it is nothing. When swallows and linnets feed themselves with the
crumbs that are thrown away from the waste of this meal, and carry them
to their young ones in their nests, shall not I remember a poor brother
who needs my help? If I durst follow my heart, ye would laugh and jeer at
me, just as ye have laughed and jeered at many others who have gone
forth into the wilderness, that they might hear no more of this world and
its generosity.'
Everybody was silent, and Roderick, perceiving the most vehement
displeasure in his friend's glowing eyes, feared he might forget himself
still more in his present ungracious mood, and tried to give the
conversation a sudden turn upon other subjects. But Emilius was
becoming restless and absent; his eyes were continually wandering
toward the upper gallery, where the servants who lived in the top story
had many things to do. 
'Who is that ugly old woman,' he at length asked, 'that is so busy there,
going backwards and forwards, in her gray cloak?' 'She is one of my
attendants,' said his bride; 'she is to overlook and manage my waitingmaids and the other girls.' 'How can you bear to have anything so hideous
always at your elbow?' replied Emilius. 'Let her alone,' answered the
young lady; 'God meant the ugly to live as well as the handsome: and she
is such a good, honest creature, she may be of great use to us.'
On rising from table, everybody pressed round the new husband, again
wished him joy, and urgently begged that he would consent to their
having a ball. The bride too said, breathing a gentle kiss on his forehead:
'You will not deny your wife's first request, my beloved; we have all been
looking forward with delight to this moment. It is so long since I danced
last, and you have never yet seen me dance. Have you no curiosity how I
shall acquit myself in this new character? My mother tells me I look better
than at any other time.'
'I never saw you thus cheerful,' said Emilius; 'I will be no disturber of
your joys: do just what you please; only let me bargain for nobody asking
me to make myself ridiculous by any clumsy capers.'
'Oh, if you are a bad dancer,' she answered, laughing, 'you may feel quite
safe; everybody will readily consent to your sitting still.' The bride then
retired to put on her ball-dress.
'She does not know,' said Emilius to Roderick, with whom he withdrew,
'that I can pass from the next room into hers through a secret door; I will
surprise her while she is dressing.'
When Emilius had left them, and many of the ladies were also gone to
make such changes in their attire as were necessary for the ball, Roderick
took the young men aside, and led the way to his own room. 'It is
wearing toward evening,' said he, 'and will soon be dark; so make haste,
every one of you, and mask yourselves, that we may render this night
glorious in the annals of merriment and madness. Give your fancies free
range in choosing your characters: the wilder and uglier the better. Try
every combination of shaggy mane, and squinting eye, and mouth like a 
gaping volcano; build mountains upon your shoulders, or fatten
yourselves into Falstaffs; and as a whet to your inventions, I hereby
promise a kiss from the bride to the figure that would be the likeliest to
make her miscarry. A wedding is such a strange event in one's life; the
bride and bridegroom are so suddenly plunged, as it were by magic, head
over heels into a new, unaccustomed element, that it is impossible to
infuse too much of madness and folly into this feast, in order to keep pace
with the whirlpool that is bearing a brace of human beings from the state
in which they were two, into the state in which they become one, and to
let all things round about them be fit accompaniments for the dizzy dream
on the wings of which they are floating toward a new life. So let us rave
away the night, making all sail before the breeze; and a fig for such as
look twice on the grave sour faces that would have you behave rationally.'
'Don't be afraid,' said the young officer; 'we have brought from town with
us a large chest full of masks and mad carnival dresses, such as would
make even you stare.'
'But see here,' returned Roderick, 'what a gem I have got from my tailor,
who was just going to cut up this peerless robe into strips. He bought it of
an old crone, who must doubtless have worn it on gala days when she
went to Lucifer's drawing-room on the Blocksberg. Look at this scarlet
bodice, with its gold tassels and fringe, at this cap besmeared with the
last fee the hag got from Beelzebub or his imps: it will give me a right
worshipful air. To match such jewels, there is this green velvet petticoat
with its saffron-coloured trimming, and this mask would melt even
Medusa to a grin. Thus accoutred I mean to lead the chorus of Graces,
myself their mother-queen, toward the bed-chamber. Make all the haste
you can; and we will then go in procession to fetch the bride.'
The bugles were still playing; the company were walking about the
garden, or sitting before the house. The sun had gone down behind thick,
murky clouds, and the country was lying in the gray dusk, when a parting
gleam suddenly burst forth athwart the cloudy veil, and flooded every
spot around, but especially the building, and its galleries, and pillars, and
wreaths of flowers, as it were with red blood. At this moment the parents
of the bride and the other spectators beheld a train of the wildest
appearances move toward the upper corridor. Roderick led the way as the 
scarlet old woman, and was followed by hump-backs, mountainpaunches, massy wigs, clowns, punches, skeleton-like pantaloons, female
figures embanked by enormous hoops and over-canopied with three feet
of horsehair, powder and pomatum, and by every disgusting shape that
can be conceived, as though a nightmare were unrolling her stores. They
jumped, and twirled, and tottered, and stumbled, and straddled, and
strutted, and swaggered along the gallery, and then vanished behind one
of the doors. But few of the beholders had been able to laugh: so utterly
were they amazed by the strange sight. Suddenly a piercing shriek burst
from one of the rooms, and there rushed forth into the blood-red glow of
the sunset the pale bride, in a short white frock, round which wreaths of
flowers were waving, with her lovely bosom all uncovered, and her rich
locks streaming through the air. As though mad, with rolling eyes and
distorted face, she darted along the gallery, and, blinded by terror, could
find neither door nor staircase; and immediately after rushed Emilius in
chase of her, with the sparkling Turkish dagger in his high, upraised hand.
Now she was at the end of the passage; she could go no further; he
reached her. His masked friends and the gray old woman were running
after him. But he had already furiously pierced her bosom, and cut
through her white neck; her blood spouted forth into the radiance of the
setting sun. The old woman had clasped round him to tear him back; he
struggled with her, and hurled himself together with her over the railing,
and they both fell, almost lifeless, down at the feet of the relations who
had been staring in dumb horror at the bloody scene. Above and below,
or hastening down the stairs and along the galleries, were seen the
hideous masks, standing or running about in various clusters, like fiends
of hell.
Roderick took his dying friend in his arms. He had found him in his wife's
room playing with the dagger. She was almost dressed when he entered.
At the sight of the hated red bodice his memory had rekindled; the
horrible vision of the night had risen upon his mind; and gnashing his
teeth he had sprung after his trembling flying bride, to avenge that
murder and all those devilish doings. The old woman, ere she expired,
confessed the crime that had been wrought; and the gladness and mirth
of the whole house were suddenly changed into sorrow and lamentation
and dismay. 
LUDWIG TIECK.
The author of the foregoing tale, Ludwig Tieck, has lately been introduced
to the English reader by an admirable translation of his two exquisite little
novels, _The Pictures_ and _The Betrothing_. He is one among the great
German writers who made their appearance during the last ten years of
the eighteenth century; a period--whether from any extraordinary
productiveness in the power that regulates the seed-time and the
harvests of the human race, or from the mighty excitements and
stimulants wherewith the world was then teeming--among the richest in
the blossoming of genius. For not to mention the great military talents
first developed in those days, among the holders of which were he who
conquered all the continent of Europe, and he before whom that
conqueror fell; turning away from the many rank but luxuriant weeds that
sprang up in France, after all its plains had been manured with blood; and
fixing the eye solely upon literary excellence, we find in our own country,
that the chief part of those men by whom we may hope that the memory
of our days will be transmitted to posterity as a thing precious and to be
held in honour, that Wordsworth, and Coleridge, and Southey, and Lamb,
and Landor, and Scott, put forth during those ten years the first-fruits of
their minds; while in Germany, the same period was rendered illustrious
by Fichte and John Paul Richter at its commencement, and subsequently
by Schelling, and Hegel, and Steffens, Schleiermacher, and the Schlegels,
and Novalis, and Tieck. Of this noble brotherhood, who all, I believe,
studied at the same university, that of Jena, and who were all bound
together by friendship, by affinity of genius, and by unity of aim, the two
latter, Novalis and Tieck, were the poets: for though there are several
things of great poetical beauty in the works of the Schlegels, their fame,
upon the whole, rests on a different basis. The lovely dreamy mind of
Novalis was cut off in the full promise of its spring; it only just awoke
from the blissful visions of its childhood, to breathe forth a few lyrical
murmurs about the mysteries it had been brooding over, and then fell
asleep again. Upon Tieck, therefore, the character of German poetry in
the age following those of Goethe and Schiller will mainly depend: and
never did Norwegian or Icelandic spring burst forth more suddenly than
the youth of Ludwig Tieck. I know not in the whole history of literature, 
any poet who can count up so many and so great exploits achieved on his
first descent into the arena: in number and variety even Goethe must
yield the precedence, though his youthful triumphs were _Goetz of
Berlichingen_ and _Werther_. There was in Tieck's early works the
promise, and far more than the promise, of the greatest dramatic poet
whom Europe had seen since the days of Calderon; there was a rich,
elastic, buoyant, comic spirit, not like the analytical reflection, keen biting
wit of Moliere and Congreve, and other comic writers of the satirical
school, but like the living merriment, the uncontrollable, exuberant
joyousness, the humour arising from _good_ humour, not, as it often
does, from _ill_ humour, the incarnation, so to say, of the principle of
mirth, in Shakespeare, and Cervantes, and Aristophanes; and as a wreath
of flowers to crown the whole, there was the heavenly purity and starlike
loveliness of his _Genoveva_. Had the rest of Tieck's life kept pace with
the fertility of the six years from 1798 to 1804, he must have been
beyond all rivalry the second of German poets; and as Eschylus in the
_Frogs_ shares his supremacy with Sophocles, so would Goethe have
invited Tieck to sit beside him on his throne. Unfortunately for those who
would have feasted upon his fruits, the poet, during the last twenty years,
has been so weighed down by almost unintermitting ill health, that he has
published but little. There was a short interval indeed that seemed to bid
fairer, about the year 1812, when he began to collect his tales and lesser
dramas, on a plan something like that of the _Decameron_, in the
_Phantasm_, but it has not yet been carried beyond the second reign, out
of seven through which it was designed to extend. Of that collection the
chief part had been known to the world ten or twelve years before: some
things, however, appeared then for the first time, and among them, I
believe, was the tale of _The Love-Charm_. Latterly, Tieck's genius has
taken a new spring, in a somewhat different direction from that of his
youth. He has written half a dozen novels, in the manner of the couple
recently translated; nor are the others of less excellence than those two;
a beautiful tale of magic has also been just published; and the speedy
appearance of several other things that have employed him during the
long period of seeming inactivity, is promised; wherein he has been
engaged more or less for above a quarter of a century, and to gather
materials for which he some years since visited England. Of this work the
highest expectations may justly be formed: not many people, even, in
this country, possess a more extensive and accurate acquaintance with 
our ancient drama than Tieck; no one has entered more fully into the
spirit of its great poets, than Tieck has shown himself to have done in the
prefaces to his _Old English Theatre_ and his _Shakespeare's Vorschule_;
few have ever bestowed such attention on the history of the stage in all
countries, or have so studied the principles of dramatic composition and
the nature of dramatic effect; hardly any one, I may say no one, ever
learnt so much from Shakespeare: no one, therefore, can have more to
teach us about him; and to judge from the remarks on some of the plays
which have already been printed in the _Abendzeitung_, no one was ever
so able to trace out the most secret workings of the great master's mind,
or to retain his full, calm self-possession when following him on his
highest flights; no one ever united in such perfection the great critic with
the great poet. One may look forward, therefore, with confidence to the
greatest work in aesthetical criticism that even Germany will ever have
produced.
Of the foregoing tale itself little need be said. If the translator has failed
so grievously that an English reader cannot see its merits, he would
hardly help himself out of the scrape by talking about the effect he ought
to have produced. And grievously he must have failed, if any reader with
a feeling for poetry does not perceive and enjoy the beauty of the
descriptions, especially of the two eventful scenes, the power and passion
of the wild dithyramb, the admirable delineation of the characters in
proportion to their relative importance, and the poetical harmony and
perfect _keeping_ of the whole. Nothing can be more delicate than the
way of softening the horror that might be felt for the bride: she has not
even a name, that there may be no distinct object for our disgust to
fasten on; she is only spoken of under titles of a pleasurable meaning;
her beauty, like Helen's on the walls of Troy, is manifested by its effect:
the young men are astonished at it; her air of deep melancholy impresses
even the gayest and most thoughtless, and is thus more powerful than if
pages had been employed in giving utterance to her remorse; besides
which, had the latter course been adopted, the main object would have
been the wicked heart, not the wicked deed, the sin, not the crime; and
sin is always loathsome, whereas a crime may often be looked upon with
pity. The poet has therefore wisely kept all his power of characteristic
delineation for the two chief persons in the tale; and rarely have any
characters been brought out so distinctly within a work of such 
dimensions; the contrast between them runs through every feature, yet
each is the necessary complement to the other; the abuse which they
vent in the ball-room each against his dearest friend, and in the ears of
almost a stranger, is in the true style of our frail affections, veering before
the slightest puff of self-will; nor is there a circumstance mentioned about
either, which tends not to complete the picture, and is not all but
indispensable. On some occasions a whole life and character are revealed
by a single touch; as for instance when Emilius exclaims, _No bread! Can
such things be?_ No other man could have been so ignorant of what goes
on in the world, as to marvel at such a common occurrence; yet Emilius,
it is quite certain, would be surprised, when awaked from his dreams, to
behold the face of real life; so that this exclamation is, as it were, a great
toe from which to construct one who is anything rather than a Hercules.
Indeed the whole scene of the peasant's marriage, which at first sight
may appear like a somewhat idle digression, brought in for no better
reason than amusement, is absolutely necessary to the tale as a work of
art: it not only shows the character of Emilius in a fresh and important
point of view, not only supplies him with fuel, so that he is ready to burn
at the approach of the first spark, as for the former scene he had been
prepared by the arousal of his feelings in the ball-room; which, besides,
cast a mysterious haze over the scene, and leave it half doubtful how
much of the crime was actually perpetrated: the peasant's wedding is
necessary as a contrast, as a complement, and as a relief to the other
marriage; nor can that calm and masterly irony, which is among the first
elements in the mind of a great poet, be more clearly manifested, than it
is here, where the pomp and rejoicing of the great and wealthy are
suddenly turned 'into sorrow and lamentation and dismay;' while the poor
and the abashed and the despised are enabled to pass their days in what
to them is comfort, and to obtain the enjoyment of a day 'unto which in
after-times they may look back with delight.'
Everything about the one marriage seems happy; everything about the
other seems wretched; but neither is what it seems: they who seem
happy are a prey to extravagant and sinful desires; those who seem
wretched have moderate wishes, and, though they have offended, have
not done it wantonly or in malice; they are making what seems to them
the only atonement in their power, and 'the fellow bears the creature the
same good-will, though she is such a sorry bit of clay'; therefore the end 
of each marriage is according, not unto the outward show and promise,
but unto that which lies within the heart. It is thus that poetical justice
endeavours, so far as it may, to anticipate the sentence of Omniscient
justice.





The Stoic
John Galsworthy
I
1
"Aequam memento rebus in arduis
Servare mentem:"--Horace.
In the City of Liverpool, on a January day of 1905, the Board-room of
"The Island Navigation Company" rested, as it were, after the labours of
the afternoon. The long table was still littered with the ink, pens, blottingpaper, and abandoned documents of six persons--a deserted battlefield of
the brain. And, lonely, in his chairman's seat at the top end old Sylvanus
Heythorp sat, with closed eyes, still and heavy as an image. One puffy,
feeble hand, whose fingers quivered, rested on the arm of his chair; the
thick white hair on his massive head glistened in the light from a greenshaded lamp. He was not asleep, for every now and then his sanguine
cheeks filled, and a sound, half sigh, half grunt, escaped his thick lips
between a white moustache and the tiny tuft of white hairs above his cleft
chin. Sunk in the chair, that square thick trunk of a body in short blackbraided coat seemed divested of all neck.
Young Gilbert Farney, secretary of "The Island Navigation Company,"
entering his hushed Board-room, stepped briskly to the table, gathered
some papers, and stood looking at his chairman. Not more than thirtyfive, with the bright hues of the optimist in his hair, beard, cheeks, and
eyes, he had a nose and lips which curled ironically. For, in his view, he
was the Company; and its Board did but exist to chequer his importance.
Five days in the week for seven hours a day he wrote, and thought, and
wove the threads of its business, and this lot came down once a week for
two or three hours, and taught their grandmother to suck eggs. But
watching that red-cheeked, white-haired, somnolent figure, his smile was
not so contemptuous as might have been expected. For after all, the
chairman was a wonderful old boy. A man of go and insight could not but 
respect him. Eighty! Half paralysed, over head and ears in debt, having
gone the pace all his life--or so they said!--till at last that mine in Ecuador
had done for him--before the secretary's day, of course, but he had heard
of it. The old chap had bought it up on spec'--"de l'audace, toujours de
l'audace," as he was so fond of saying--paid for it half in cash and half in
promises, and then--the thing had turned out empty, and left him with
L20,000 worth of the old shares unredeemed. The old boy had weathered
it out without a bankruptcy so far. Indomitable old buffer; and never
fussy like the rest of them! Young Farney, though a secretary, was
capable of attachment; and his eyes expressed a pitying affection. The
Board meeting had been long and "snadgy"--a final settling of that Pillin
business. Rum go the chairman forcing it on them like this! And with quiet
satisfaction the secretary thought 'And he never would have got it
through if I hadn't made up my mind that it really is good business!' For
to expand the company was to expand himself. Still, to buy four ships
with the freight market so depressed was a bit startling, and there would
be opposition at the general meeting. Never mind! He and the chairman
could put it through--put it through. And suddenly he saw the old man
looking at him.
Only from those eyes could one appreciate the strength of life yet flowing
underground in that well-nigh helpless carcase--deep-coloured little blue
wells, tiny, jovial, round windows.
A sigh travelled up through layers of flesh, and he said almost inaudibly:
"Have they come, Mr. Farney?"
"Yes, sir. I've put them in the transfer office; said you'd be with them in a
minute; but I wasn't going to wake you."
"Haven't been asleep. Help me up."
Grasping the edge of the table with his trembling hands, the old man
pulled, and, with Farney heaving him behind, attained his feet. He stood
about five feet ten, and weighed fully fourteen stone; not corpulent, but
very thick all through; his round and massive head alone would have
outweighed a baby. With eyes shut, he seemed to be trying to get the 
better of his own weight, then he moved with the slowness of a barnacle
towards the door. The secretary, watching him, thought: 'Marvellous old
chap! How he gets about by himself is a miracle! And he can't retire, they
say-lives on his fees!'
But the chairman was through the green baize door. At his tortoise gait
he traversed the inner office, where the youthful clerks suspended their
figuring--to grin behind his back--and entered the transfer office, where
eight gentlemen were sitting. Seven rose, and one did not. Old Heythorp
raised a saluting hand to the level of his chest and moving to an armchair, lowered himself into it.
"Well, gentlemen?"
One of the eight gentlemen got up again.
"Mr. Heythorp, we've appointed Mr. Brownbee to voice our views. Mr.
Brownbee!" And down he sat.
Mr. Brownbee rose a stoutish man some seventy years of age, with little
grey side whiskers, and one of those utterly steady faces only to be seen
in England, faces which convey the sense of business from father to son
for generations; faces which make wars, and passion, and free thought
seem equally incredible; faces which inspire confidence, and awaken in
one a desire to get up and leave the room. Mr. Brownbee rose, and said
in a suave voice:
"Mr. Heythorp, we here represent about L14,000. When we had the
pleasure of meeting you last July, you will recollect that you held out a
prospect of some more satisfactory arrangement by Christmas. We are
now in January, and I am bound to say we none of us get younger."
From the depths of old Heythorp a preliminary rumble came travelling,
reached the surface, and materialised--
"Don't know about you--feel a boy, myself."
The eight gentlemen looked at him. Was he going to try and put them off
again? Mr. Brownbee said with unruffled calm:
"I'm sure we're very glad to hear it. But to come to the point. We have
felt, Mr. Heythorp, and I'm sure you won't think it unreasonable, that--er-
-bankruptcy would be the most satisfactory solution. We have waited a
long time, and we want to know definitely where we stand; for, to be
quite frank, we don't see any prospect of improvement; indeed, we fear
the opposite."
"You think I'm going to join the majority."
This plumping out of what was at the back of their minds produced in Mr.
Brownbee and his colleagues a sort of chemical disturbance. They
coughed, moved their feet, and turned away their eyes, till the one who
had not risen, a solicitor named Ventnor, said bluffly:
"Well, put it that way if you like."
Old Heythorp's little deep eyes twinkled.
"My grandfather lived to be a hundred; my father ninety-six--both of
them rips. I'm only eighty, gentlemen; blameless life compared with
theirs."
"Indeed," Mr. Brownbee said, "we hope you have many years of this life
before you."
"More of this than of another." And a silence fell, till old Heythorp added:
"You're getting a thousand a year out of my fees. Mistake to kill the goose
that lays the golden eggs. I'll make it twelve hundred. If you force me to
resign my directorships by bankruptcy, you won't get a rap, you know."
Mr. Brownbee cleared his throat:
"We think, Mr. Heythorp, you should make it at least fifteen hundred. In
that case we might perhaps consider--"
Old Heythorp shook his head.
"We can hardly accept your assertion that we should get nothing in the
event of bankruptcy. We fancy you greatly underrate the possibilities.
Fifteen hundred a year is the least you can do for us."
"See you d---d first."
Another silence followed, then Ventnor, the solicitor, said irascibly:
"We know where we are, then."
Brownbee added almost nervously:
"Are we to understand that twelve hundred a year is your--your last
word?"
Old Heythorp nodded. "Come again this day month, and I'll see what I
can do for you;" and he shut his eyes.
Round Mr. Brownbee six of the gentlemen gathered, speaking in low
voices; Mr. Ventnor nursed a leg and glowered at old Heythorp, who sat
with his eyes closed. Mr. Brownbee went over and conferred with Mr.
Ventnor, then clearing his throat, he said:
"Well, sir, we have considered your proposal; we agree to accept it for the
moment. We will come again, as you suggest, in a month's time.
"We hope that you will by then have seen your way to something more
substantial, with a view to avoiding what we should all regret, but which I
fear will otherwise become inevitable."
Old Heythorp nodded. The eight gentlemen took their hats, and went out
one by one, Mr. Brownbee courteously bringing up the rear.
The old man, who could not get up without assistance, stayed musing in
his chair. He had diddled 'em for the moment into giving him another
month, and when that month was up-he would diddle 'em again! A month 
ought to make the Pillin business safe, with all that hung on it. That poor
funkey chap Joe Pillin! A gurgling chuckle escaped his red lips. What a
shadow the fellow had looked, trotting in that evening just a month ago,
behind his valet's announcement: "Mr. Pillin, sir."
What a parchmenty, precise, thread-paper of a chap, with his bird's claw
of a hand, and his muffled-up throat, and his quavery:
"How do you do, Sylvanus? I'm afraid you're not--"
"First rate. Sit down. Have some port."
"Port! I never drink it. Poison to me! Poison!"
"Do you good!"
"Oh! I know, that's what you always say."
"You've a monstrous constitution, Sylvanus. If I drank port and smoked
cigars and sat up till one o'clock, I should be in my grave to-morrow. I'm
not the man I was. The fact is, I've come to see if you can help me. I'm
getting old; I'm growing nervous...."
"You always were as chickeny as an old hen, Joe."
"Well, my nature's not like yours. To come to the point, I want to sell my
ships and retire. I need rest. Freights are very depressed. I've got my
family to think of."
"Crack on, and go broke; buck you up like anything!"
"I'm quite serious, Sylvanus."
"Never knew you anything else, Joe."
A quavering cough, and out it had come:
"Now--in a word--won't your 'Island Navigation Company' buy my ships?"
A pause, a twinkle, a puff of smoke. "Make it worth my while!" He had
said it in jest; and then, in a flash, the idea had come to him. Rosamund
and her youngsters! What a chance to put something between them and
destitution when he had joined the majority! And so he said: "We don't
want your silly ships."
That claw of a hand waved in deprecation. "They're very good ships--
doing quite well. It's only my wretched health. If I were a strong man I
shouldn't dream...."
"What d'you want for 'em?" Good Lord! how he jumped if you asked him a
plain question. The chap was as nervous as a guinea-fowl!
"Here are the figures--for the last four years. I think you'll agree that I
couldn't ask less than seventy thousand."
Through the smoke of his cigar old Heythorp had digested those figures
slowly, Joe Pillin feeling his teeth and sucking lozenges the while; then he
said:
"Sixty thousand! And out of that you pay me ten per cent., if I get it
through for you. Take it or leave it."
"My dear Sylvanus, that's almost-cynical."
"Too good a price--you'll never get it without me."
"But a--but a commission! You could never disclose it!"
"Arrange that all right. Think it over. Freights'll go lower yet. Have some
port."
"No, no! Thank you. No! So you think freights will go lower?"
"Sure of it."
"Well, I'll be going. I'm sure I don't know. It's--it's--I must think."
"Think your hardest."
"Yes, yes. Good-bye. I can't imagine how you still go on smoking those
things and drinking port.
"See you in your grave yet, Joe." What a feeble smile the poor fellow had!
Laugh-he couldn't! And, alone again, he had browsed, developing the idea
which had come to him.
Though, to dwell in the heart of shipping, Sylvanus Heythorp had lived at
Liverpool twenty years, he was from the Eastern Counties, of a family so
old that it professed to despise the Conquest. Each of its generations
occupied nearly twice as long as those of less tenacious men. Traditionally
of Danish origin, its men folk had as a rule bright reddish-brown hair, red
cheeks, large round heads, excellent teeth and poor morals. They had
done their best for the population of any county in which they had
settled; their offshoots swarmed. Born in the early twenties of the
nineteenth century, Sylvanus Heythorp, after an education broken by
escapades both at school and college, had fetched up in that simple
London of the late forties, where claret, opera, and eight per cent. for
your money ruled a cheery roost. Made partner in his shipping firm well
before he was thirty, he had sailed with a wet sheet and a flowing tide;
dancers, claret, Cliquot, and piquet; a cab with a tiger; some travel--all
that delicious early-Victorian consciousness of nothing save a golden time.
It was all so full and mellow that he was forty before he had his only love
affair of any depth--with the daughter of one of his own clerks, a liaison
so awkward as to necessitate a sedulous concealment. The death of that
girl, after three years, leaving him a natural son, had been the chief,
perhaps the only real, sorrow of his life. Five years later he married. What
for? God only knew! as he was in the habit of remarking. His wife had
been a hard, worldly, well-connected woman, who presented him with
two unnatural children, a girl and a boy, and grew harder, more worldly,
less handsome, in the process. The migration to Liverpool, which took
place when he was sixty and she forty-two, broke what she still had of
heart, but she lingered on twelve years, finding solace in bridge, and
being haughty towards Liverpool. Old Heythorp saw her to her rest
without regret. He had felt no love for her whatever, and practically none 
for her two children--they were in his view colourless, pragmatical, very
unexpected characters. His son Ernest--in the Admiralty--he thought a
poor, careful stick. His daughter Adela, an excellent manager, delighting
in spiritual conversation and the society of tame men, rarely failed to
show him that she considered him a hopeless heathen. They saw as little
as need be of each other. She was provided for under that settlement he
had made on her mother fifteen years ago, well before the not altogether
unexpected crisis in his affairs. Very different was the feeling he had
bestowed on that son of his "under the rose." The boy, who had always
gone by his mother's name of Larne, had on her death been sent to some
relations of hers in Ireland, and there brought up. He had been called to
the Dublin bar, and married, young, a girl half Cornish and half Irish;
presently, having cost old Heythorp in all a pretty penny, he had died
impecunious, leaving his fair Rosamund at thirty with a girl of eight and a
boy of five. She had not spent six months of widowhood before coming
over from Dublin to claim the old man's guardianship. A remarkably
pretty woman, like a full-blown rose, with greenish hazel eyes, she had
turned up one morning at the offices of "The Island Navigation Company,"
accompanied by her two children--for he had never divulged to them his
private address. And since then they had always been more or less on his
hands, occupying a small house in a suburb of Liverpool. He visited them
there, but never asked them to the house in Sefton Park, which was in
fact his daughter's; so that his proper family and friends were unaware of
their existence.
Rosamund Larne was one of those precarious ladies who make uncertain
incomes by writing full-bodied storyettes. In the most dismal
circumstances she enjoyed a buoyancy bordering on the indecent; which
always amused old Heythorp's cynicism. But of his grandchildren Phyllis
and Jock (wild as colts) he had become fond. And this chance of getting
six thousand pounds settled on them at a stroke had seemed to him
nothing but heaven-sent. As things were, if he "went off"--and, of course,
he might at any moment, there wouldn't be a penny for them; for he
would "cut up" a good fifteen thousand to the bad. He was now giving
them some three hundred a year out of his fees; and dead directors
unfortunately earned no fees! Six thousand pounds at four and a half per
cent., settled so that their mother couldn't "blue it," would give them a
certain two hundred and fifty pounds a year-better than beggary. And the 
more he thought the better he liked it, if only that shaky chap, Joe Pillin,
didn't shy off when he'd bitten his nails short over it!
Four evenings later, the "shaky chap" had again appeared at his house in
Sefton Park.
"I've thought it over, Sylvanus. I don't like it.
"No; but you'll do it."
"It's a sacrifice. Fifty-four thousand for four ships--it means a
considerable reduction in my income."
"It means security, my boy."
"Well, there is that; but you know, I really can't be party to a secret
commission. If it came out, think of my name and goodness knows what."
"It won't come out."
"Yes, yes, so you say, but--"
"All you've got to do's to execute a settlement on some third parties that
I'll name. I'm not going to take a penny of it myself. Get your own lawyer
to draw it up and make him trustee. You can sign it when the purchase
has gone through. I'll trust you, Joe. What stock have you got that gives
four and a half per cent.?"
"Midland"
"That'll do. You needn't sell."
"Yes, but who are these people?"
"Woman and her children I want to do a good turn to." What a face the
fellow had made! "Afraid of being connected with a woman, Joe?"
"Yes, you may laugh--I am afraid of being connected with someone else's
woman. I don't like it--I don't like it at all. I've not led your life,
Sylvanus."
"Lucky for you; you'd have been dead long ago. Tell your lawyer it's an
old flame of yours--you old dog!"
"Yes, there it is at once, you see. I might be subject to blackmail."
"Tell him to keep it dark, and just pay over the income, quarterly."
"I don't like it, Sylvanus--I don't like it."
"Then leave it, and be hanged to you. Have a cigar?"
"You know I never smoke. Is there no other way?"
"Yes. Sell stock in London, bank the proceeds there, and bring me six
thousand pounds in notes. I'll hold 'em till after the general meeting. If
the thing doesn't go through, I'll hand 'em back to you."
"No; I like that even less."
"Rather I trusted you, eh!"
"No, not at all, Sylvanus, not at all. But it's all playing round the law."
"There's no law to prevent you doing what you like with your money.
What I do's nothing to you. And mind you, I'm taking nothing from it--not
a mag. You assist the widowed and the fatherless--just your line, Joe!"
"What a fellow you are, Sylvanus; you don't seem capable of taking
anything seriously."
"Care killed the cat!"
Left alone after this second interview he had thought: 'The beggar'll
jump.'
And the beggar had. That settlement was drawn and only awaited
signature. The Board to-day had decided on the purchase; and all that
remained was to get it ratified at the general meeting. Let him but get
that over, and this provision for his grandchildren made, and he would
snap his fingers at Brownbee and his crew-the canting humbugs! "Hope
you have many years of this life before you!" As if they cared for anything
but his money--their money rather! And becoming conscious of the length
of his reverie, he grasped the arms of his chair, heaved at his own bulk,
in an effort to rise, growing redder and redder in face and neck. It was
one of the hundred things his doctor had told him not to do for fear of
apoplexy, the humbug! Why didn't Farney or one of those young fellows
come and help him up? To call out was undignified. But was he to sit
there all night? Three times he failed, and after each failure sat
motionless again, crimson and exhausted; the fourth time he succeeded,
and slowly made for the office. Passing through, he stopped and said in
his extinct voice:
"You young gentlemen had forgotten me."
"Mr. Farney said you didn't wish to be disturbed, sir."
"Very good of him. Give me my hat and coat."
"Yes, sir."
"Thank you. What time is it?"
"Six o'clock, sir."
"Tell Mr. Farney to come and see me tomorrow at noon, about my speech
for the general meeting."
"Yes, Sir."
"Good-night to you."
"Good-night, Sir."
At his tortoise gait he passed between the office stools to the door,
opened it feebly, and slowly vanished.
Shutting the door behind him, a clerk said:
"Poor old chairman! He's on his last!"
Another answered:
"Gosh! He's a tough old hulk. He'll go down fightin'."
2
Issuing from the offices of "The Island Navigation Company," Sylvanus
Heythorp moved towards the corner whence he always took tram to
Sefton Park. The crowded street had all that prosperous air of catching or
missing something which characterises the town where London and New
York and Dublin meet. Old Heythorp had to cross to the far side, and he
sallied forth without regard to traffic. That snail-like passage had in it a
touch of the sublime; the old man seemed saying: "Knock me down and
be d---d to you--I'm not going to hurry." His life was saved perhaps ten
times a day by the British character at large, compounded of phlegm and
a liking to take something under its protection. The tram conductors on
that line were especially used to him, never failing to catch him under the
arms and heave him like a sack of coals, while with trembling hands he
pulled hard at the rail and strap.
"All right, sir?"
"Thank you."
He moved into the body of the tram, where somebody would always get
up from kindness and the fear that he might sit down on them; and there
he stayed motionless, his little eyes tight closed. With his red face, tuft of
white hairs above his square cleft block of shaven chin, and his big highcrowned bowler hat, which yet seemed too petty for his head with its 
thick hair--he looked like some kind of an idol dug up and decked out in
gear a size too small.
One of those voices of young men from public schools and exchanges
where things are bought and sold, said:
"How de do, Mr. Heythorp?"
Old Heythorp opened his eyes. That sleek cub, Joe Pillin's son! What a
young pup-with his round eyes, and his round cheeks, and his little
moustache, his fur coat, his spats, his diamond pin!
"How's your father?" he said.
"Thanks, rather below par, worryin' about his ships. Suppose you haven't
any news for him, sir?"
Old Heythorp nodded. The young man was one of his pet abominations,
embodying all the complacent, little-headed mediocrity of this new
generation; natty fellows all turned out of the same mould, sippers and
tasters, chaps without drive or capacity, without even vices; and he did
not intend to gratify the cub's curiosity.
"Come to my house," he said; "I'll give you a note for him."
"Tha-anks; I'd like to cheer the old man up."
The old man! Cheeky brat! And closing his eyes he relapsed into
immobility. The tram wound and ground its upward way, and he mused.
When he was that cub's age--twenty-eight or whatever it might be--he
had done most things; been up Vesuvius, driven four-in-hand, lost his last
penny on the Derby and won it back on the Oaks, known all the dancers
and operatic stars of the day, fought a duel with a Yankee at Dieppe and
winged him for saying through his confounded nose that Old England was
played out; been a controlling voice already in his shipping firm; drunk
five other of the best men in London under the table; broken his neck
steeple-chasing; shot a burglar in the legs; been nearly drowned, for a
bet; killed snipe in Chelsea; been to Court for his sins; stared a ghost out 
of countenance; and travelled with a lady of Spain. If this young pup had
done the last, it would be all he had; and yet, no doubt, he would call
himself a "spark."
The conductor touched his arm.
"'Ere you are, sir."
"Thank you."
He lowered himself to the ground, and moved in the bluish darkness
towards the gate of his daughter's house. Bob Pillin walked beside him,
thinking: 'Poor old josser, he is gettin' a back number!' And he said: "I
should have thought you ought to drive, sir. My old guv'nor would knock
up at once if he went about at night like this."
The answer rumbled out into the misty air:
"Your father's got no chest; never had."
Bob Pillin gave vent to one of those fat cackles which come so readily
from a certain type of man; and old Heythorp thought:
'Laughing at his father! Parrot!'
They had reached the porch.
A woman with dark hair and a thin, straight face and figure was arranging
some flowers in the hall. She turned and said:
"You really ought not to be so late, Father! It's wicked at this time of
year. Who is it--oh! Mr. Pillin, how do you do? Have you had tea? Won't
you come to the drawing-room; or do you want to see my father?"
"Tha-anks! I believe your father--" And he thought: 'By Jove! the old chap
is a caution!' For old Heythorp was crossing the hall without having paid
the faintest attention to his daughter. Murmuring again:
"Tha-anks awfully; he wants to give me something," he followed. Miss
Heythorp was not his style at all; he had a kind of dread of that thin
woman who looked as if she could never be unbuttoned. They said she
was a great churchgoer and all that sort of thing.
In his sanctum old Heythorp had moved to his writing-table, and was
evidently anxious to sit down.
"Shall I give you a hand, sir?"
Receiving a shake of the head, Bob Pillin stood by the fire and watched.
The old "sport" liked to paddle his own canoe. Fancy having to lower
yourself into a chair like that! When an old Johnny got to such a state it
was really a mercy when he snuffed out, and made way for younger men.
How his Companies could go on putting up with such a fossil for chairman
was a marvel! The fossil rumbled and said in that almost inaudible voice:
"I suppose you're beginning to look forward to your father's shoes?"
Bob Pillin's mouth opened. The voice went on:
"Dibs and no responsibility. Tell him from me to drink port--add five years
to his life."
To this unwarranted attack Bob Pillin made no answer save a laugh; he
perceived that a manservant had entered the room.
"A Mrs. Larne, sir. Will you see her?"
At this announcement the old man seemed to try and start; then he
nodded, and held out the note he had written. Bob Pillin received it
together with the impression of a murmur which sounded like: "Scratch a
poll, Poll!" and passing the fine figure of a woman in a fur coat, who
seemed to warm the air as she went by, he was in the hall again before
he perceived that he had left his hat.
A young and pretty girl was standing on the bearskin before the fire,
looking at him with round-eyed innocence. He thought: 'This is better; I
mustn't disturb them for my hat'; and approaching the fire, said:
"Jolly cold, isn't it?"
The girl smiled: "Yes-jolly."
He noticed that she had a large bunch of violets at her breast, a lot of fair
hair, a short straight nose, and round blue-grey eyes very frank and
open. "Er" he said, "I've left my hat in there."
"What larks!" And at her little clear laugh something moved within Bob
Pillin.
"You know this house well?"
She shook her head. "But it's rather scrummy, isn't it?"
Bob Pillin, who had never yet thought so answered:
"Quite O.K."
The girl threw up her head to laugh again. "O.K.? What's that?"
Bob Pillin saw her white round throat, and thought: 'She is a ripper!' And
he said with a certain desperation:
"My name's Pillin. Yours is Larne, isn't it? Are you a relation here?"
"He's our Guardy. Isn't he a chook?"
That rumbling whisper like "Scratch a Poll, Poll!" recurring to Bob Pillin, he
said with reservation:
"You know him better than I do." "Oh! Aren't you his grandson, or
something?"
Bob Pillin did not cross himself.
"Lord! No! My dad's an old friend of his; that's all."
"Is your dad like him?"
"Not much."
"What a pity! It would have been lovely if they'd been Tweedles."
Bob Pillin thought: 'This bit is something new. I wonder what her Christian
name is.' And he said:
"What did your godfather and godmothers in your baptism---?"
The girl laughed; she seemed to laugh at everything.
"Phyllis."
Could he say: "Is my only joy"? Better keep it! But-for what? He wouldn't
see her again if he didn't look out! And he said:
"I live at the last house in the park-the red one. D'you know it? Where do
you?"
"Oh! a long way--23, Millicent Villas. It's a poky little house. I hate it. We
have awful larks, though."
"Who are we?"
"Mother, and myself, and Jock--he's an awful boy. You can't conceive
what an awful boy he is. He's got nearly red hair; I think he'll be just like
Guardy when he gets old. He's awful!"
Bob Pillin murmured:
"I should like to see him."
"Would you? I'll ask mother if you can. You won't want to again; he goes
off all the time like a squib." She threw back her head, and again Bob
Pillin felt a little giddy. He collected himself, and drawled:
"Are you going in to see your Guardy?"
"No. Mother's got something special to say. We've never been here
before, you see. Isn't he fun, though?"
"Fun!"
"I think he's the greatest lark; but he's awfully nice to me. Jock calls him
the last of the Stoic'uns."
A voice called from old Heythorp's den:
"Phyllis!" It had a particular ring, that voice, as if coming from beautifully
formed red lips, of which the lower one must curve the least bit over; it
had, too, a caressing vitality, and a kind of warm falsity.
The girl threw a laughing look back over her shoulder, and vanished
through the door into the room.
Bob Pillin remained with his back to the fire and his puppy round eyes
fixed on the air that her figure had last occupied. He was experiencing a
sensation never felt before. Those travels with a lady of Spain, charitably
conceded him by old Heythorp, had so far satisfied the emotional side of
this young man; they had stopped short at Brighton and Scarborough,
and been preserved from even the slightest intrusion of love. A calculated
and hygienic career had caused no anxiety either to himself or his father;
and this sudden swoop of something more than admiration gave him an
uncomfortable choky feeling just above his high round collar, and in the
temples a sort of buzzing--those first symptoms of chivalry. A man of the
world does not, however, succumb without a struggle; and if his hat had
not been out of reach, who knows whether he would not have left the
house hurriedly, saying to himself: "No, no, my boy; Millicent Villas is
hardly your form, when your intentions are honourable"? For somehow
that round and laughing face, bob of glistening hair, those wide-opened 
grey eyes refused to awaken the beginnings of other intentions--such is
the effect of youth and innocence on even the steadiest young men. With
a kind of moral stammer, he was thinking: 'Can I--dare I offer to see
them to their tram? Couldn't I even nip out and get the car round and
send them home in it? No, I might miss them--better stick it out here!
What a jolly laugh! What a tipping face--strawberries and cream, hay, and
all that! Millicent Villas!' And he wrote it on his cuff.
The door was opening; he heard that warm vibrating voice: "Come along,
Phyllis!"--the girl's laugh so high and fresh: "Right-o! Coming!" And with,
perhaps, the first real tremor he had ever known, he crossed to the front
door. All the more chivalrous to escort them to the tram without a hat!
And suddenly he heard: "I've got your hat, young man!" And her mother's
voice, warm, and simulating shock: "Phyllis, you awful gairl! Did you ever
see such an awful gairl; Mr.---"
"Pillin, Mother."
And then--he did not quite know how--insulated from the January air by
laughter and the scent of fur and violets, he was between them walking to
their tram. It was like an experience out of the "Arabian Nights," or
something of that sort, an intoxication which made one say one was going
their way, though one would have to come all the way back in the same
beastly tram. Nothing so warming had ever happened to him as sitting
between them on that drive, so that he forgot the note in his pocket, and
his desire to relieve the anxiety of the "old man," his father. At the tram's
terminus they all got out. There issued a purr of invitation to come and
see them some time; a clear: "Jock'll love to see you!" A low laugh: "You
awful gairl!" And a flash of cunning zigzagged across his brain. Taking off
his hat, he said:
"Thanks awfully; rather!" and put his foot back on the step of the tram.
Thus did he delicately expose the depths of his chivalry!
"Oh! you said you were going our way! What one-ers you do tell! Oh!"
The words were as music; the sight of those eyes growing rounder, the
most perfect he had ever seen; and Mrs. Larne's low laugh, so warm yet
so preoccupied, and the tips of the girl's fingers waving back above her 
head. He heaved a sigh, and knew no more till he was seated at his club
before a bottle of champagne. Home! Not he! He wished to drink and
dream. "The old man" would get his news all right to-morrow!
3
The words: "A Mrs. Larne to see you, sir," had been of a nature to
astonish weaker nerves. What had brought her here? She knew she
mustn't come! Old Heythorp had watched her entrance with cynical
amusement. The way she whiffed herself at that young pup in passing,
the way her eyes slid round! He had a very just appreciation of his son's
widow; and a smile settled deep between his chin tuft and his moustache.
She lifted his hand, kissed it, pressed it to her splendid bust, and said:
"So here I am at last, you see. Aren't you surprised?"
Old Heythorp, shook his head.
"I really had to come and see you, Guardy; we haven't had a sight of you
for such an age. And in this awful weather! How are you, dear old
Guardy?"
"Never better." And, watching her green-grey eyes, he added:
"Haven't a penny for you!"
Her face did not fall; she gave her feather-laugh.
"How dreadful of you to think I came for that! But I am in an awful fix,
Guardy."
"Never knew you not to be."
"Just let me tell you, dear; it'll be some relief. I'm having the most
terrible time."
She sank into a low chair, disengaging an overpowering scent of violets,
while melancholy struggled to subdue her face and body.
"The most awful fix. I expect to be sold up any moment. We may be on
the streets to-morrow. I daren't tell the children; they're so happy, poor
darlings. I shall be obliged to take Jock away from school. And Phyllis will
have to stop her piano and dancing; it's an absolute crisis. And all due to
those Midland Syndicate people. I've been counting on at least two
hundred for my new story, and the wretches have refused it."
With a tiny handkerchief she removed one tear from the corner of one
eye. "It is hard, Guardy; I worked my brain silly over that story."
From old Heythorp came a mutter which sounded suspiciously like:
"Rats!"
Heaving a sigh, which conveyed nothing but the generosity of her
breathing apparatus, Mrs. Larne went on:
"You couldn't, I suppose, let me have just one hundred?"
"Not a bob."
She sighed again, her eyes slid round the room; then in her warm voice
she murmured:
"Guardy, you were my dear Philip's father, weren't you? I've never said
anything; but of course you were. He was so like you, and so is Jock."
Nothing moved in old Heythorp's face. No pagan image consulted with
flowers and song and sacrifice could have returned less answer. Her dear
Philip! She had led him the devil of a life, or he was a Dutchman! And
what the deuce made her suddenly trot out the skeleton like this? But
Mrs. Larne's eyes were still wandering.
"What a lovely house! You know, I think you ought to help me, Guardy.
Just imagine if your grandchildren were thrown out into the street!"
The old man grinned. He was not going to deny his relationship--it was
her look-out, not his. But neither was he going to let her rush him.
"And they will be; you couldn't look on and see it. Do come to my rescue
this once. You really might do something for them."
With a rumbling sigh he answered:
"Wait. Can't give you a penny now. Poor as a church mouse."
"Oh! Guardy
"Fact."
Mrs. Larne heaved one of her most buoyant sighs. She certainly did not
believe him.
"Well!" she said; "you'll be sorry when we come round one night and sing
for pennies under your window. Wouldn't you like to see Phyllis? I left her
in the hall. She's growing such a sweet gairl. Guardy just fifty!"
"Not a rap."
Mrs. Larne threw up her hands. "Well! You'll repent it. I'm at my last
gasp." She sighed profoundly, and the perfume of violets escaped in a
cloud; Then, getting up, she went to the door and called: "Phyllis!"
When the girl entered old Heythorp felt the nearest approach to a flutter
of the heart for many years. She had put her hair up! She was like a
spring day in January; such a relief from that scented humbug, her
mother. Pleasant the touch of her lips on his forehead, the sound of her
clear voice, the sight of her slim movements, the feeling that she did him
credit--clean-run stock, she and that young scamp Jock--better than the
holy woman, his daughter Adela, would produce if anyone were ever fool
enough to marry her, or that pragmatical fellow, his son Ernest.
And when they were gone he reflected with added zest on the six
thousand pounds he was getting for them out of Joe Pillin and his ships.
He would have to pitch it strong in his speech at the general meeting.
With freights so low, there was bound to be opposition. No dash
nowadays; nothing but gabby caution! They were a scrim-shanking lot on
the Board--he had had to pull them round one by one--the deuce of a tug
getting this thing through! And yet, the business was sound enough.
Those ships would earn money, properly handled-good money.
His valet, coming in to prepare him for dinner, found him asleep. He had
for the old man as much admiration as may be felt for one who cannot
put his own trousers on. He would say to the housemaid Molly: "He's a
game old blighter--must have been a rare one in his day. Cocks his hat at
you, even now, I see!" To which the girl, Irish and pretty, would reply:
"Well, an' sure I don't mind, if it gives um a pleasure. 'Tis better anyway
than the sad eye I get from herself."
At dinner, old Heythorp always sat at one end of the rosewood table and
his daughter at the other. It was the eminent moment of the day. With
napkin tucked high into his waistcoat, he gave himself to the meal with
passion. His palate was undimmed, his digestion unimpaired. He could
still eat as much as two men, and drink more than one. And while he
savoured each mouthful he never spoke if he could help it. The holy
woman had nothing to say that he cared to hear, and he nothing to say
that she cared to listen to. She had a horror, too, of what she called "the
pleasures of the table"--those lusts of the flesh! She was always longing
to dock his grub, he knew. Would see her further first! What other
pleasures were there at his age? Let her wait till she was eighty. But she
never would be; too thin and holy!
This evening, however, with the advent of the partridge she did speak.
"Who were your visitors, Father?"
Trust her for nosing anything out! Fixing his little blue eyes on her, he
mumbled with a very full mouth: "Ladies."
"So I saw; what ladies?"
He had a longing to say: 'Part of one of my families under the rose.' As a
fact it was the best part of the only one, but the temptation to multiply
exceedingly was almost overpowering. He checked himself, however, and
went on eating partridge, his secret irritation crimsoning his cheeks; and
he watched her eyes, those cold precise and round grey eyes, noting it,
and knew she was thinking: 'He eats too much.'
She said: "Sorry I'm not considered fit to be told. You ought not to be
drinking hock."
Old Heythorp took up the long green glass, drained it, and repressing
fumes and emotion went on with his partridge. His daughter pursed her
lips, took a sip of water, and said:
"I know their name is Larne, but it conveyed nothing to me; perhaps it's
just as well."
The old man, mastering a spasm, said with a grin:
"My daughter-in-law and my granddaughter."
"What! Ernest married--Oh! nonsense!"
He chuckled, and shook his head.
"Then do you mean to say, Father, that you were married before you
married my mother?"
"No."
The expression on her face was as good as a play!
She said with a sort of disgust: "Not married! I see. I suppose those
people are hanging round your neck, then; no wonder you're always in
difficulties. Are there any more of them?"
Again the old man suppressed that spasm, and the veins in his neck and
forehead swelled alarmingly. If he had spoken he would infallibly have
choked. He ceased eating, and putting his hands on the table tried to
raise himself. He could not and subsiding in his chair sat glaring at the
stiff, quiet figure of his daughter.
"Don't be silly, Father, and make a scene before Meller. Finish your
dinner."
He did not answer. He was not going to sit there to be dragooned and
insulted! His helplessness had never so weighed on him before. It was like
a revelation. A log--that had to put up with anything! A log! And, waiting
for his valet to return, he cunningly took up his fork.
In that saintly voice of hers she said:
"I suppose you don't realise that it's a shock to me. I don't know what
Ernest will think--"
"Ernest be d---d."
"I do wish, Father, you wouldn't swear."
Old Heythorp's rage found vent in a sort of rumble. How the devil had he
gone on all these years in the same house with that woman, dining with
her day after day! But the servant had come back now, and putting down
his fork he said:
"Help me up!"
The man paused, thunderstruck, with the souffle balanced. To leave
dinner unfinished--it was a portent!
"Help me up!"
"Mr. Heythorp's not very well, Meller; take his other arm."
The old man shook off her hand.
"I'm very well. Help me up. Dine in my own room in future."
Raised to his feet, he walked slowly out; but in his sanctum he did not sit
down, obsessed by this first overwhelming realisation of his helplessness.
He stood swaying a little, holding on to the table, till the servant, having
finished serving dinner, brought in his port.
"Are you waiting to sit down, sir?"
He shook his head. Hang it, he could do that for himself, anyway. He
must think of something to fortify his position against that woman. And
he said:
"Send me Molly!"
"Yes, sir." The man put down the port and went.
Old Heythorp filled his glass, drank, and filled again. He took a cigar from
the box and lighted it. The girl came in, a grey-eyed, dark-haired damsel,
and stood with her hands folded, her head a little to one side, her lips a
little parted. The old man said:
"You're a human being."
"I would hope so, sirr."
"I'm going to ask you something as a human being--not a servant--see?"
"No, sirr; but I will be glad to do anything you like."
"Then put your nose in here every now and then, to see if I want
anything. Meller goes out sometimes. Don't say anything; Just put your
nose in."
"Oh! an' I will; 'tis a pleasure 'twill be to do ut."
He nodded, and when she had gone lowered himself into his chair with a
sense of appeasement. Pretty girl! Comfort to see a pretty face--not a
pale, peeky thing like Adela's. His anger burned up anew. So she counted
on his helplessness, had begun to count on that, had she? She should see
that there was life in the old dog yet! And his sacrifice of the uneaten
souffle, the still less eaten mushrooms, the peppermint sweet with which
he usually concluded dinner, seemed to consecrate that purpose. They all
thought he was a hulk, without a shot left in the locker! He had seen a
couple of them at the Board that afternoon shrugging at each other, as
though saying: 'Look at him!' And young Farney pitying him. Pity,
forsooth! And that coarse-grained solicitor chap at the creditors' meeting
curling his lip as much as to say: 'One foot in the grave!' He had seen the
clerks dowsing the glim of their grins; and that young pup Bob Pillin
screwing up his supercilious mug over his dog-collar. He knew that
scented humbug Rosamund was getting scared that he'd drop off before
she'd squeezed him dry. And his valet was always looking him up and
down queerly. As to that holy woman--! Not quite so fast! Not quite so
fast! And filling his glass for the fourth time, he slowly sucked down the
dark red fluid, with the "old boots" flavour which his soul loved, and,
drawing deep at his cigar, closed his eyes.
II
1
The room in the hotel where the general meetings of "The Island
Navigation Company" were held was nearly full when the secretary came
through the door which as yet divided the shareholders from their
directors. Having surveyed their empty chairs, their ink and papers, and
nodded to a shareholder or two, he stood, watch in hand, contemplating
the congregation. A thicker attendance than he had ever seen! Due, no
doubt, to the lower dividend, and this Pillin business. And his tongue
curled. For if he had a natural contempt for his Board, with the exception
of the chairman, he had a still more natural contempt for his
shareholders. Amusing spectacle when you came to think of it, a general
meeting! Unique! Eighty or a hundred men, and five women, assembled
through sheer devotion to their money. Was any other function in the 
world so single-hearted. Church was nothing to it--so many motives were
mingled there with devotion to one's soul. A well-educated young man--
reader of Anatole France, and other writers--he enjoyed ironic
speculation. What earthly good did they think they got by coming here?
Half-past two! He put his watch back into his pocket, and passed into the
Board-room.
There, the fumes of lunch and of a short preliminary meeting made cosy
the February atmosphere. By the fire four directors were conversing
rather restlessly; the fifth was combing his beard; the chairman sat with
eyes closed and red lips moving rhythmically in the sucking of a lozenge,
the slips of his speech ready in his hand. The secretary said in his cheerful
voice: "Time, sir."
Old Heythorp swallowed, lifted his arms, rose with help, and walked
through to his place at the centre of the table. The five directors followed.
And, standing at the chairman's right, the secretary read the minutes,
forming the words precisely with his curling tongue. Then, assisting the
chairman to his feet, he watched those rows of faces, and thought:
'Mistake to let them see he can't get up without help. He ought to have
let me read his speech--I wrote it.'
The chairman began to speak:
"It is my duty and my pleasure,' ladies and gentlemen, for the nineteenth
consecutive year to present to you the directors' report and the accounts
for the past twelve months. You will all have had special notice of a
measure of policy on which your Board has decided, and to which you will
be asked to-day to give your adherence--to that I shall come at the end
of my remarks...."
"Excuse me, sir; we can't hear a word down here."
'Ah!' thought the secretary, 'I was expecting that.'
The chairman went on, undisturbed. But several shareholders now rose,
and the same speaker said testily: "We might as well go home. If the
chairman's got no voice, can't somebody read for him?"
The chairman took a sip of water, and resumed. Almost all in the last six
rows were now on their feet, and amid a hubbub of murmurs the
chairman held out to the secretary the slips of his speech, and fell heavily
back into his chair.
The secretary re-read from the beginning; and as each sentence fell from
his tongue, he thought: 'How good that is!' 'That's very clear!' 'A neat
touch!' 'This is getting them.' It seemed to him a pity they could not know
it was all his composition. When at last he came to the Pillin sale he
paused for a second.
"I come now to the measure of policy to which I made allusion at the
beginning of my speech. Your Board has decided to expand your
enterprise by purchasing the entire fleet of Pillin & Co., Ltd. By this
transaction we become the owners of the four steamships Smyrna,
Damascus, Tyre, and Sidon, vessels in prime condition with a total
freight-carrying capacity of fifteen thousand tons, at the low inclusive
price of sixty thousand pounds. Gentlemen, de l'audace, toujours de
l'audace!"--it was the chairman's phrase, his bit of the speech, and the
secretary did it more than justice. "Times are bad, but your Board is
emphatically of the opinion that they are touching bottom; and this, in
their view, is the psychological moment for a forward stroke. They
confidently recommend your adoption of their policy and the ratification of
this purchase, which they believe will, in the not far distant future,
substantially increase the profits of the Company." The secretary sat
down with reluctance. The speech should have continued with a number
of appealing sentences which he had carefully prepared, but the chairman
had cut them out with the simple comment: "They ought to be glad of the
chance." It was, in his view, an error.
The director who had combed his beard now rose--a man of presence,
who might be trusted to say nothing long and suavely. While he was
speaking the secretary was busy noting whence opposition was likely to
come. The majority were sitting owl-like-a good sign; but some dozen
were studying their copies of the report, and three at least were making
notes--Westgate, for, instance, who wanted to get on the Board, and was
sure to make himself unpleasant--the time-honoured method of vinegar; 
and Batterson, who also desired to come on, and might be trusted to
support the Board--the time-honoured method of oil; while, if one knew
anything of human nature, the fellow who had complained that he might
as well go home would have something uncomfortable to say. The
director finished his remarks, combed his beard with his fingers, and sat
down.
A momentary pause ensued. Then Messieurs Westgate and Batterson rose
together. Seeing the chairman nod towards the latter, the secretary
thought: 'Mistake! He should have humoured Westgate by giving him
precedence.' But that was the worst of the old man, he had no notion of
the suaviter in modo! Mr. Batterson thus unchained--would like, if he
might be so allowed, to congratulate the Board on having piloted their
ship so smoothly through the troublous waters of the past year. With their
worthy chairman still at the helm, he had no doubt that in spite of the still
low--he would not say falling--barometer, and the-er-unseasonable
climacteric, they might rely on weathering the--er--he would not say
storm. He would confess that the present dividend of four per cent. was
not one which satisfied every aspiration (Hear, hear!), but speaking for
himself, and he hoped for others--and here Mr. Batterson looked round--
he recognised that in all the circumstances it was as much as they had
the right--er--to expect. But following the bold but to his mind prudent
development which the Board proposed to make, he thought that they
might reasonably, if not sanguinely, anticipate a more golden future.
("No, no!") A shareholder said, 'No, no!' That might seem to indicate a
certain lack of confidence in the special proposal before the meeting.
("Yes!") From that lack of confidence he would like at once to dissociate
himself. Their chairman, a man of foresight and acumen, and valour
proved on many a field and--er--sea, would not have committed himself
to this policy without good reason. In his opinion they were in safe hands,
and he was glad to register his support of the measure proposed. The
chairman had well said in his speech: 'de l'audace, toujours de l'audace!'
Shareholders would agree with him that there could be no better motto
for Englishmen. Ahem!
Mr. Batterson sat down. And Mr. Westgate rose: He wanted--he said--to
know more, much more, about this proposition, which to his mind was of
a very dubious wisdom.... 'Ah!' thought the secretary, 'I told the old boy 
he must tell them more'.... To whom, for instance, had the proposal first
been made? To him!--the chairman said. Good! But why were Pillins
selling, if freights were to go up, as they were told?
"Matter of opinion."
"Quite so; and in my opinion they are going lower, and Pillins were right
to sell. It follows that we are wrong to buy." ("Hear, hear!" "No, no!")
"Pillins are shrewd people. What does the chairman say? Nerves! Does he
mean to tell us that this sale was the result of nerves?"
The chairman nodded.
"That appears to me a somewhat fantastic theory; but I will leave that
and confine myself to asking the grounds on which the chairman bases
his confidence; in fact, what it is which is actuating the Board in pressing
on us at such a time what I have no hesitation in stigmatising as a rash
proposal. In a word, I want light as well as leading in this matter."
Mr. Westgate sat down.
What would the chairman do now? The situation was distinctly awkward--
seeing his helplessness and the lukewarmness of the Board behind him.
And the secretary felt more strongly than ever the absurdity of his being
an underling, he who in a few well-chosen words could so easily have
twisted the meeting round his thumb. Suddenly he heard the long,
rumbling sigh which preluded the chairman's speeches.
"Has any other gentleman anything to say before I move the adoption of
the report?"
Phew! That would put their backs up. Yes, sure enough it had brought
that fellow, who had said he might as well go home, to his feet! Now for
something nasty!
"Mr. Westgate requires answering. I don't like this business. I don't
impute anything to anybody; but it looks to me as if there were
something behind it which the shareholders ought to be told. Not only 
that; but, to speak frankly, I'm not satisfied to be ridden over roughshod
in this fashion by one who, whatever he may have been in the past, is
obviously not now in the prime of his faculties."
With a gasp the secretary thought: 'I knew that was a plain-spoken man!'
He heard again the rumbling beside him. The chairman had gone crimson,
his mouth was pursed, his little eyes were very blue.
"Help me up," he said.
The secretary helped him, and waited, rather breathless.
The chairman took a sip of water, and his voice, unexpectedly loud, broke
an ominous hush:
"Never been so insulted in my life. My best services have been at your
disposal for nineteen years; you know what measure of success this
Company has attained. I am the oldest man here, and my experience of
shipping is, I hope, a little greater than that of the two gentlemen who
spoke last. I have done my best for you, ladies and gentlemen, and we
shall see whether you are going to endorse an indictment of my judgment
and of my honour, if I am to take the last speaker seriously. This
purchase is for your good. 'There is a tide in the affairs of men'--and I for
one am not content, never have been, to stagnate. If that is what you
want, however, by all means give your support to these gentlemen and
have done with it. I tell you freights will go up before the end of the year;
the purchase is a sound one, more than a sound one--I, at any rate,
stand or fall by it. Refuse to ratify it, if you like; if you do, I shall resign."
He sank back into his seat. The secretary, stealing a glance, thought with
a sort of enthusiasm: 'Bravo! Who'd have thought he could rally his voice
like that? A good touch, too, that about his honour! I believe he's knocked
them.
It's still dicky, though, if that fellow at the back gets up again; the old
chap can't work that stop a second time. 'Ah! here was 'old Apple-pie' on
his hind legs. That was all right!
"I do not hesitate to say that I am an old friend of the chairman; we are,
many of us, old friends of the chairman, and it has been painful to me,
and I doubt not to others, to hear an attack made on him. If he is old in
body, he is young in mental vigour and courage. I wish we were all as
young. We ought to stand by him; I say, we ought to stand by him."
("Hear, hear! Hear, hear!") And the secretary thought: 'That's done it!'
And he felt a sudden odd emotion, watching the chairman bobbing his
body, like a wooden toy, at old Appleby; and old Appleby bobbing back.
Then, seeing a shareholder close to the door get up, thought: 'Who's
that? I know his face--Ah! yes; Ventnor, the solicitor--he's one of the
chairman's creditors that are coming again this afternoon. What now?'
"I can't agree that we ought to let sentiment interfere with our judgment
in this matter. The question is simply: How are our pockets going to be
affected? I came here with some misgivings, but the attitude of the
chairman has been such as to remove them; and I shall support the
proposition." The secretary thought: 'That's all right--only, he said it
rather queerly--rather queerly.'
Then, after a long silence, the chairman, without rising, said:
"I move the adoption of the report and accounts."
"I second that."
"Those in favour signify the same in the usual way. Contrary? Carried."
The secretary noted the dissentients, six in number, and that Mr.
Westgate did not vote.
A quarter of an hour later he stood in the body of the emptying room
supplying names to one of the gentlemen of the Press. The passionless
fellow said: "Haythorp, with an 'a'; oh! an 'e'; he seems an old man.
Thank you. I may have the slips? Would you like to see a proof? With an
'a' you said--oh! an 'e.' Good afternoon!" And the secretary thought:
'Those fellows, what does go on inside them? Fancy not knowing the old
chairman by now!'...
2
Back in the proper office of "The Island Navigation Company" old
Heythorp sat smoking a cigar and smiling like a purring cat. He was
dreaming a little of his triumph, sifting with his old brain, still subtle, the
wheat from the chaff of the demurrers: Westgate--nothing in that--
professional discontent till they silenced him with a place on the board--
but not while he held the reins! That chap at the back--an ill-conditioned
fellow! "Something behind!" Suspicious brute! There was something--but-
-hang it! they might think themselves lucky to get four ships at that price,
and all due to him! It was on the last speaker that his mind dwelt with a
doubt. That fellow Ventnor, to whom he owed money--there had been
something just a little queer about his tone--as much as to say, "I smell a
rat." Well! one would see that at the creditors' meeting in half an hour.
"Mr. Pillin, sir."
"Show him in!"
In a fur coat which seemed to extinguish his thin form, Joe Pillin entered.
It was snowing, and the cold had nipped and yellowed his meagre face
between its slight grey whiskering. He said thinly:
"How are you, Sylvanus? Aren't you perished in this cold?"
"Warm as a toast. Sit down. Take off your coat."
"Oh! I should be lost without it. You must have a fire inside you. So-so it's
gone through?"
Old Heythorp nodded; and Joe Pillin, wandering like a spirit, scrutinised
the shut door. He came back to the table, and said in a low voice:
"It's a great sacrifice."
Old Heythorp smiled.
"Have you signed the deed poll?"
Producing a parchment from his pocket Joe Pillin unfolded it with caution
to disclose his signature, and said:
"I don't like it--it's irrevocable."
A chuckle escaped old Heythorp.
"As death."
Joe Pillin's voice passed up into the treble clef.
"I can't bear irrevocable things. I consider you stampeded me, playing on
my nerves."
Examining the signatures old Heythorp murmured:
"Tell your lawyer to lock it up. He must think you a sad dog, Joe."
"Ah! Suppose on my death it comes to the knowledge of my wife!"
"She won't be able to make it hotter for you than you'll be already."
Joe Pillin replaced the deed within his coat, emitting a queer thin noise.
He simply could not bear joking on such subjects.
"Well," he said, "you've got your way; you always do. Who is this Mrs.
Larne? You oughtn't to keep me in the dark. It seems my boy met her at
your house. You told me she didn't come there."
Old Heythorp said with relish:
"Her husband was my son by a woman I was fond of before I married;
her children are my grandchildren. You've provided for them. Best thing
you ever did."
"I don't know--I don't know. I'm sorry you told me. It makes it all the
more doubtful. As soon as the transfer's complete, I shall get away
abroad. This cold's killing me. I wish you'd give me your recipe for
keeping warm."
"Get a new inside."
Joe Pillin regarded his old friend with a sort of yearning. "And yet," he
said, "I suppose, with your full-blooded habit, your life hangs by a thread,
doesn't it?"
"A stout one, my boy"
"Well, good-bye, Sylvanus. You're a Job's comforter; I must be getting
home." He put on his hat, and, lost in his fur coat, passed out into the
corridor. On the stairs he met a man who said:
"How do you do, Mr. Pillin? I know your son. Been' seeing the chairman? I
see your sale's gone through all right. I hope that'll do us some good, but
I suppose you think the other way?"
Peering at him from under his hat, Joe Pillin said:
"Mr. Ventnor, I think? Thank you! It's very cold, isn't it?" And, with that
cautious remark, he passed on down.
Alone again, old Heythorp thought: 'By George! What a wavering,
quavering, thread paper of a fellow! What misery life must be to a chap
like that! He walks in fear--he wallows in it. Poor devil!' And a curious
feeling swelled his heart, of elation, of lightness such as he had not
known for years. Those two young things were safe now from penurysafe! After dealing with those infernal creditors of his he would go round
and have a look at the children. With a hundred and twenty a year the
boy could go into the Army--best place for a young scamp like that. The
girl would go off like hot cakes, of course, but she needn't take the first
calf that came along. As for their mother, she must look after herself;
nothing under two thousand a year would keep her out of debt. But trust
her for wheedling and bluffing her way out of any scrape! Watching his 
cigar-smoke curl and disperse he was conscious of the strain he had been
under these last six weeks, aware suddenly of how greatly he had
baulked at thought of to-day's general meeting. Yes! It might have turned
out nasty. He knew well enough the forces on the Board, and off, who
would be only too glad to shelve him. If he were shelved here his other
two Companies would be sure to follow suit, and bang would go every
penny of his income--he would be a pauper dependant on that holy
woman. Well! Safe now for another year if he could stave off these sharks
once more. It might be a harder job this time, but he was in luck--in luck,
and it must hold. And taking a luxurious pull at his cigar, he rang the
handbell.
"Bring 'em in here, Mr. Farney. And let me have a cup of China tea as
strong as you can make it."
"Yes, sir. Will you see the proof of the press report, or will you leave it to
me?"
"To you."
"Yes, sir. It was a good meeting, wasn't it?"
Old Heythorp nodded.
"Wonderful how your voice came back just at the right moment. I was
afraid things were going to be difficult. The insult did it, I think. It was a
monstrous thing to say. I could have punched his head."
Again old Heythorp nodded; and, looking into the secretary's fine blue
eyes, he repeated: "Bring 'em in."
The lonely minute before the entrance of his creditors passed in the
thought: 'So that's how it struck him! Short shrift I should get if it came
out.'
The gentlemen, who numbered ten this time, bowed to their debtor,
evidently wondering why the deuce they troubled to be polite to an old
man who kept them out of their money. Then, the secretary reappearing 
with a cup of China tea, they watched while their debtor drank it. The feat
was tremulous. Would he get through without spilling it all down his front,
or choking? To those unaccustomed to his private life it was slightly
miraculous. He put the cup down empty, tremblingly removed some
yellow drops from the little white tuft below his lip, refit his cigar, and
said:
"No use beating about the bush, gentlemen; I can offer you fourteen
hundred a year so long as I live and hold my directorships, and not a
penny more. If you can't accept that, you must make me bankrupt and
get about sixpence in the pound. My qualifying shares will fetch a couple
of thousand at market price. I own nothing else. The house I live in, and
everything in it, barring my clothes, my wine, and my cigars, belong to
my daughter under a settlement fifteen years old. My solicitors and
bankers will give you every information. That's the position in a nutshell."
In spite of business habits the surprise of the ten gentlemen was only
partially concealed. A man who owed them so much would naturally say
he owned nothing, but would he refer them to his solicitors and bankers
unless he were telling the truth? Then Mr. Ventnor said:
"Will you submit your pass books?"
"No, but I'll authorise my bankers to give you a full statement of my
receipts for the last five years--longer, if you like."
The strategic stroke of placing the ten gentlemen round the Board table
had made it impossible for them to consult freely without being
overheard, but the low-voiced transference of thought travelling round
was summed up at last by Mr. Brownbee.
"We think, Mr. Heythorp, that your fees and dividends should enable you
to set aside for us a larger sum. Sixteen hundred, in fact, is what we think
you should give us yearly. Representing, as we do, sixteen thousand
pounds, the prospect is not cheering, but we hope you have some good
years before you yet. We understand your income to be two thousand
pounds."
Old Heythorp shook his head. "Nineteen hundred and thirty pounds in a
good year. Must eat and drink; must have a man to look after me not as
active as I was. Can't do on less than five hundred pounds. Fourteen
hundred's all I can give you, gentlemen; it's an advance of two hundred
pounds. That's my last word."
The silence was broken by Mr. Ventnor.
"And it's my last word that I'm not satisfied. If these other gentlemen
accept your proposition I shall be forced to consider what I can do on my
own account."
The old man stared at him, and answered:
"Oh! you will, sir; we shall see."
The others had risen and were gathered in a knot at the end of the table;
old Heythorp and Mr. Ventnor alone remained seated. The old man's
lower lip projected till the white hairs below stood out like bristles. 'You
ugly dog,' he was thinking, 'you think you've got something up your
sleeve. Well, do your worst!' The "ugly dog" rose abruptly and joined the
others. And old Heythorp closed his eyes, sitting perfectly still, with his
cigar, which had gone out, sticking up between his teeth. Mr. Brownbee
turning to voice the decision come to, cleared his throat.
"Mr. Heythorp," he said, "if your bankers and solicitors bear out your
statements, we shall accept your offer faute de mieux, in consideration of
your--" but meeting the old man's eyes, which said so very plainly: "Blow
your consideration!" he ended with a stammer: "Perhaps you will kindly
furnish us with the authorisation you spoke of?"
Old Heythorp nodded, and Mr. Brownbee, with a little bow, clasped his hat
to his breast and moved towards the door. The nine gentlemen followed.
Mr. Ventnor, bringing up the rear, turned and looked back. But the old
man's eyes were already closed again.
The moment his creditors were gone, old Heythorp sounded the handbell.
"Help me up, Mr. Farney. That Ventnor--what's his holding?"
"Quite small. Only ten shares, I think."
"Ah! What time is it?"
"Quarter to four, sir."
"Get me a taxi."
After visiting his bank and his solicitors he struggled once more into his
cab and caused it to be driven towards Millicent Villas. A kind of sleepy
triumph permeated his whole being, bumped and shaken by the cab's
rapid progress. So! He was free of those sharks now so long as he could
hold on to his Companies; and he would still have a hundred a year or
more to spare for Rosamund and her youngsters. He could live on four
hundred, or even three-fifty, without losing his independence, for there
would be no standing life in that holy woman's house unless he could pay
his own scot! A good day's work! The best for many a long month!
The cab stopped before the villa.
3
There are rooms which refuse to give away their owners, and rooms
which seem to say: 'They really are like this.' Of such was Rosamund
Larne's--a sort of permanent confession, seeming to remark to anyone
who entered: 'Her taste? Well, you can see--cheerful and exuberant; her
habits--yes, she sits here all the morning in a dressing-gown, smoking
cigarettes and dropping ink; kindly observe my carpet. Notice the piano--
it has a look of coming and going, according to the exchequer. This very
deep-cushioned sofa is permanent, however; the water-colours on the
walls are safe, too--they're by herself. Mark the scent of mimosa--she
likes flowers, and likes them strong. No clock, of course. Examine the
bureau--she is obviously always ringing for "the drumstick," and saying:
"Where's this, Ellen, and where's that? You naughty gairl, you've been 
tidying." Cast an eye on that pile of manuscript--she has evidently a
genius for composition; it flows off her pen--like Shakespeare, she never
blots a line. See how she's had the electric light put in, instead of that
horrid gas; but try and turn either of them on--you can't; last quarter
isn't paid, of course; and she uses an oil lamp, you can tell that by the
ceiling: The dog over there, who will not answer to the name of 'Carmen,'
a Pekinese spaniel like a little Djin, all prominent eyes rolling their blacks,
and no nose between--yes, Carmen looks as if she didn't know what was
coming next; she's right--it's a pet-and-slap-again life! Consider, too, the
fittings of the tea-tray, rather soiled, though not quite tin, but I say unto
you that no millionaire's in all its glory ever had a liqueur bottle on it.'
When old Heythorp entered this room, which extended from back to front
of the little house, preceded by the announcement "Mr. Aesop," it was
resonant with a very clatter-bodandigo of noises, from Phyllis playing the
Machiche; from the boy Jock on the hearthrug, emitting at short intervals
the most piercing notes from an ocarina; from Mrs. Larne on the sofa,
talking with her trailing volubility to Bob Pillin; from Bob Pillin muttering:
"Ye-es! Qui-ite! Ye-es!" and gazing at Phyllis over his collar. And, on the
window-sill, as far as she could get from all this noise, the little dog
Carmen was rolling her eyes. At sight of their visitor Jock blew one
rending screech, and bolting behind the sofa, placed his chin on its top, so
that nothing but his round pink unmoving face was visible; and the dog
Carmen tried to climb the blind cord.
Encircled from behind by the arms of Phyllis, and preceded by the
gracious perfumed bulk of Mrs. Larne, old Heythorp was escorted to the
sofa. It was low, and when he had plumped down into it, the boy Jock
emitted a hollow groan. Bob Pillin was the first to break the silence.
"How are you, sir? I hope it's gone through."
Old Heythorp nodded. His eyes were fixed on the liqueur, and Mrs. Larne
murmured:
"Guardy, you must try our new liqueur. Jock, you awful boy, get up and
bring Guardy a glass."
The boy Jock approached the tea-table, took up a glass, put it to his eye
and filled it rapidly.
"You horrible boy, you could see that glass has been used."
In a high round voice rather like an angel's, Jock answered:
"All right, Mother; I'll get rid of it," and rapidly swallowing the yellow
liquor, took up another glass.
Mrs. Larne laughed.
"What am I to do with him?"
A loud shriek prevented a response. Phyllis, who had taken her brother by
the ear to lead him to the door, let him go to clasp her injured self.
Bob Pillin went hastening towards her; and following the young man with
her chin, Mrs. Larne said, smiling:
"Aren't those children awful? He's such a nice fellow. We like him so
much, Guardy."
The old man grinned. So she was making up to that young pup!
Rosamund Larne, watching him, murmured:
"Oh! Guardy, you're as bad as Jock. He takes after you terribly. Look at
the shape of his head. Jock, come here!" The innocent boy approached;
with his girlish complexion, his flowery blue eyes, his perfect mouth, he
stood before his mother like a large cherub. And suddenly he blew his
ocarina in a dreadful manner. Mrs. Larne launched a box at his ears, and
receiving the wind of it he fell prone.
"That's the way he behaves. Be off with you, you awful boy. I want to talk
to Guardy."
The boy withdrew on his stomach, and sat against the wall cross-legged,
fixing his innocent round eyes on old Heythorp. Mrs. Larne sighed.
"Things are worse and worse, Guardy. I'm at my wits' end to tide over
this quarter. You wouldn't advance me a hundred on my new story? I'm
sure to get two for it in the end."
The old man shook his head.
"I've done something for you and the children," he said. "You'll get notice
of it in a day or two; ask no questions."
"Oh! Guardy! Oh! you dear!" And her gaze rested on Bob Pillin, leaning
over the piano, where Phyllis again sat.
Old Heythorp snorted. "What are you cultivating that young gaby for? She
mustn't be grabbed up by any fool who comes along."
Mrs. Larne murmured at once:
"Of course, the dear gairl is much too young. Phyllis, come and talk to
Guardy!"
When the girl was installed beside him on the sofa, and he had felt that
little thrill of warmth the proximity of youth can bring, he said:
"Been a good girl?"
She shook her head.
"Can't, when Jock's not at school. Mother can't pay for him this term."
Hearing his name, the boy Jock blew his ocarina till Mrs. Larne drove him
from the room, and Phyllis went on:
"He's more awful than anything you can think of. Was my dad at all like
him, Guardy? Mother's always so mysterious about him. I suppose you
knew him well."
Old Heythorp, incapable of confusion, answered stolidly:
"Not very."
"Who was his father? I don't believe even mother knows."
"Man about town in my day."
"Oh! your day must have been jolly. Did you wear peg-top trousers, and
dundreary's?"
Old Heythorp nodded.
"What larks! And I suppose you had lots of adventures with opera dancers
and gambling. The young men are all so good now." Her eyes rested on
Bob Pillin. "That young man's a perfect stick of goodness."
Old Heythorp grunted.
"You wouldn't know how good he was," Phyllis went on musingly, "unless
you'd sat next him in a tunnel. The other day he had his waist squeezed
and he simply sat still and did nothing. And then when the tunnel ended,
it was Jock after all, not me. His face was--Oh! ah! ha! ha! Ah! ha!" She
threw back her head, displaying all her white, round throat. Then edging
near, she whispered:
"He likes to pretend, of course, that he's fearfully lively. He's promised to
take mother and me to the theatre and supper afterwards. Won't it be
scrummy! Only, I haven't anything to go in."
Old Heythorp said: "What do you want? Irish poplin?"
Her mouth opened wide: "Oh! Guardy! Soft white satin!"
"How many yards'll go round you?"
"I should think about twelve. We could make it ourselves. You are a
chook!"
A scent of hair, like hay, enveloped him, her lips bobbed against his
nose,--and there came a feeling in his heart as when he rolled the first sip
of a special wine against his palate. This little house was a rumty-too
affair, her mother was a humbug, the boy a cheeky young rascal, but
there was a warmth here he never felt in that big house which had been
his wife's and was now his holy daughter's. And once more he rejoiced at
his day's work, and the success of his breach of trust, which put some
little ground beneath these young feet, in a hard and unscrupulous world.
Phyllis whispered in his ear:
"Guardy, do look; he will stare at me like that. Isn't it awful--like a boiled
rabbit?"
Bob Pillin, attentive to Mrs. Larne, was gazing with all his might over her
shoulder at the girl. The young man was moonstruck, that was clear!
There was something almost touching in the stare of those puppy dog's
eyes. And he thought 'Young beggar--wish I were his age!' The utter
injustice of having an old and helpless body, when your desire for
enjoyment was as great as ever! They said a man was as old as he felt!
Fools! A man was as old as his legs and arms, and not a day younger. He
heard the girl beside him utter a discomfortable sound, and saw her face
cloud as if tears were not far off; she jumped up, and going to the
window, lifted the little dog and buried her face in its brown and white fur.
Old Heythorp thought: 'She sees that her humbugging mother is using
her as a decoy.' But she had come back, and the little dog, rolling its eyes
horribly at the strange figure on the sofa, in a desperate effort to escape
succeeded in reaching her shoulder, where it stayed perched like a cat,
held by one paw and trying to back away into space. Old Heythorp said
abruptly:
"Are you very fond of your mother?"
"Of course I am, Guardy. I adore her."
"H'm! Listen to me. When you come of age or marry, you'll have a
hundred and twenty a year of your own that you can't get rid of. Don't
ever be persuaded into doing what you don't want. And remember: Your 
mother's a sieve, no good giving her money; keep what you'll get for
yourself--it's only a pittance, and you'll want it all--every penny."
Phyllis's eyes had opened very wide; so that he wondered if she had
taken in his words.
"Oh! Isn't money horrible, Guardy?"
"The want of it."
"No, it's beastly altogether. If only we were like birds. Or if one could put
out a plate overnight, and have just enough in the morning to use during
the day."
Old Heythorp sighed.
"There's only one thing in life that matters--independence. Lose that, and
you lose everything. That's the value of money. Help me up."
Phyllis stretched out her hands, and the little dog, running down her back,
resumed its perch on the window-sill, close to the blind cord.
Once on his feet, old Heythorp said:
"Give me a kiss. You'll have your satin tomorrow."
Then looking at Bob Pillin, he remarked:
"Going my way? I'll give you a lift."
The young man, giving Phyllis one appealing look, answered dully: "Thaanks!" and they went out together to the taxi. In that draughtless vehicle
they sat, full of who knows what contempt of age for youth; and youth for
age; the old man resenting this young pup's aspiration to his
granddaughter; the young man annoyed that this old image had dragged
him away before he wished to go. Old Heythorp said at last:
"Well?"
Thus expected to say something, Bob Pillin muttered
"Glad your meetin' went off well, sir. You scored a triumph I should
think."
"Why?"
"Oh! I don't know. I thought you had a good bit of opposition to contend
with."
Old Heythorp looked at him.
"Your grandmother!" he said; then, with his habitual instinct of attack,
added: "You make the most of your opportunities, I see."
At this rude assault Bob Pillin's red-cheeked face assumed a certain
dignity. "I don't know what you mean, sir. Mrs. Larne is very kind to me."
"No doubt. But don't try to pick the flowers."
Thoroughly upset, Bob Pillin preserved a dogged silence. This fortnight,
since he had first met Phyllis in old Heythorp's hall, had been the most
singular of his existence up to now. He would never have believed that a
fellow could be so quickly and completely bowled, could succumb without
a kick, without even wanting to kick. To one with his philosophy of having
a good time and never committing himself too far, it was in the nature of
"a fair knock-out," and yet so pleasurable, except for the wear and tear
about one's chances. If only he knew how far the old boy really counted in
the matter! To say: "My intentions are strictly honourable" would be oldfashioned; besides--the old fellow might have no right to hear it. They
called him Guardy, but without knowing more he did not want to admit
the old curmudgeon's right to interfere.
"Are you a relation of theirs, sir?"
Old Heythorp nodded.
Bob Pillin went on with desperation:
"I should like to know what your objection to me is."
The old man turned his head so far as he was able; a grim smile bristled
the hairs about his lips, and twinkled in his eyes. What did he object to?
Why--everything! Object to! That sleek head, those puppy-dog eyes,
fattish red cheeks, high collars, pearl pin, spats, and drawl-pah! the
imbecility, the smugness of his mug; no go, no devil in any of his sort, in
any of these fish-veined, coddled-up young bloods, nothing but playing
for safety! And he wheezed out:
"Milk and water masquerading as port wine."
Bob Pillin frowned.
It was almost too much for the composure even of a man of the world.
That this paralytic old fellow should express contempt for his virility was
really the last thing in jests. Luckily he could not take it seriously. But
suddenly he thought: 'What if he really has the power to stop my going
there, and means to turn them against me!' And his heart quailed.
"Awfully sorry, sir," he said, "if you don't think I'm wild enough. Anything
I can do for you in that line--"
The old man grunted; and realising that he had been quite witty, Bob
Pillin went on:
"I know I'm not in debt, no entanglements, got a decent income, pretty
good expectations and all that; but I can soon put that all right if I'm not
fit without."
It was perhaps his first attempt at irony, and he could not help thinking
how good it was.
But old Heythorp preserved a deadly silence. He looked like a stuffed
man, a regular Aunt Sally sitting there, with the fixed red in his cheeks,
his stivered hair, square block of a body, and no neck that you could see-
only wanting the pipe in his mouth! Could there really be danger from
such an old idol? The idol spoke:
"I'll give you a word of advice. Don't hang round there, or you'll burn your
fingers. Remember me to your father. Good-night!"
The taxi had stopped before the house in Sefton Park. An insensate
impulse to remain seated and argue the point fought in Bob Pillin with an
impulse to leap out, shake his fist in at the window, and walk off. He
merely said, however:
"Thanks for the lift. Good-night!" And, getting out deliberately, he walked
off.
Old Heythorp, waiting for the driver to help him up, thought 'Fatter, but
no more guts than his father!'
In his sanctum he sank at once into his chair. It was wonderfully still
there every day at this hour; just the click of the coals, just the faintest
ruffle from the wind in the trees of the park. And it was cosily warm, only
the fire lightening the darkness. A drowsy beatitude pervaded the old
man. A good day's work! A triumph--that young pup had said. Yes!
Something of a triumph! He had held on, and won. And dinner to look
forward to, yet. A nap--a nap! And soon, rhythmic, soft, sonorous, his
breathing rose, with now and then that pathetic twitching of the old who
dream.
III
1
When Bob Pillin emerged from the little front garden of 23, Millicent Villas
ten days later, his sentiments were ravelled, and he could not get hold of
an end to pull straight the stuff of his mind.
He had found Mrs. Larne and Phyllis in the sitting-room, and Phyllis had
been crying; he was sure she had been crying; and that memory still 
infected the sentiments evoked by later happenings. Old Heythorp had
said: "You'll burn your fingers." The process had begun. Having sent her
daughter away on a pretext really a bit too thin, Mrs. Larne had installed
him beside her scented bulk on the sofa, and poured into his ear such a
tale of monetary woe and entanglement, such a mass of present
difficulties and rosy prospects, that his brain still whirled, and only one
thing emerged clearly-that she wanted fifty pounds, which she would
repay him on quarter-day; for their Guardy had made a settlement by
which, until the dear children came of age, she would have sixty pounds
every quarter. It was only a question of a few weeks; he might ask
Messrs. Scriven and Coles; they would tell him the security was quite
safe. He certainly might ask Messrs. Scriven and Coles--they happened to
be his father's solicitors; but it hardly seemed to touch the point. Bob
Pillin had a certain shrewd caution, and the point was whether he was
going to begin to lend money to a woman who, he could see, might
borrow up to seventy times seven on the strength of his infatuation for
her daughter. That was rather too strong! Yet, if he didn't she might take
a sudden dislike to him, and where would he be then? Besides, would not
a loan make his position stronger? And then--such is the effect of love
even on the younger generation--that thought seemed to him unworthy.
If he lent at all, it should be from chivalry--ulterior motives might go
hang! And the memory of the tear-marks on Phyllis's pretty pale-pink
cheeks; and her petulantly mournful: "Oh! young man, isn't money
beastly!" scraped his heart, and ravished his judgment. All the same, fifty
pounds was fifty pounds, and goodness knew how much more; and what
did he know of Mrs. Larne, after all, except that she was a relative of old
Heythorp's and wrote stories--told them too, if he was not mistaken?
Perhaps it would be better to see Scrivens'. But again that absurd nobility
assaulted him. Phyllis! Phyllis! Besides, were not settlements always
drawn so that they refused to form security for anything? Thus, hampered
and troubled, he hailed a cab. He was dining with the Ventnors on the
Cheshire side, and would be late if he didn't get home sharp to dress.
Driving, white-tied--and waist-coated, in his father's car, he thought with
a certain contumely of the younger Ventnor girl, whom he had been wont
to consider pretty before he knew Phyllis. And seated next her at dinner,
he quite enjoyed his new sense of superiority to her charms, and the ease
with which he could chaff and be agreeable. And all the time he suffered 
from the suppressed longing which scarcely ever left him now, to think
and talk of Phyllis. Ventnor's fizz was good and plentiful, his old Madeira
absolutely first chop, and the only other man present a teetotal curate,
who withdrew with the ladies to talk his parish shop. Favoured by these
circumstances, and the perception that Ventnor was an agreeable fellow,
Bob Pillin yielded to his secret itch to get near the subject of his
affections.
"Do you happen," he said airily, "to know a Mrs. Larne--relative of old
Heythorp's--rather a handsome woman-she writes stories."
Mr. Ventnor shook his head. A closer scrutiny than Bob Pillin's would have
seen that he also moved his ears.
"Of old Heythorp's? Didn't know he had any, except his daughter, and
that son of his in the Admiralty."
Bob Pillin felt the glow of his secret hobby spreading within him.
"She is, though--lives rather out of town; got a son and daughter. I
thought you might know her stories--clever woman."
Mr. Ventnor smiled. "Ah!" he said enigmatically, "these lady novelists!
Does she make any money by them?"
Bob Pillin knew that to make money by writing meant success, but that
not to make money by writing was artistic, and implied that you had
private means, which perhaps was even more distinguished. And he said:
"Oh! she has private means, I know."
Mr. Ventnor reached for the Madeira.
"So she's a relative of old Heythorp's," he said. "He's a very old friend of
your father's. He ought to go bankrupt, you know."
To Bob Pillin, glowing with passion and Madeira, the idea of bankruptcy
seemed discreditable in connection with a relative of Phyllis. Besides, the 
old boy was far from that! Had he not just made this settlement on Mrs.
Larne? And he said:
"I think you're mistaken. That's of the past."
Mr. Ventnor smiled.
"Will you bet?" he said.
Bob Pillin also smiled. "I should be bettin' on a certainty."
Mr. Ventnor passed his hand over his whiskered face. "Don't you believe
it; he hasn't a mag to his name. Fill your glass."
Bob Pillin said, with a certain resentment:
"Well, I happen to know he's just made a settlement of five or six
thousand pounds. Don't know if you call that being bankrupt."
"What! On this Mrs. Larne?"
Confused, uncertain whether he had said something derogatory or
indiscreet, or something which added distinction to Phyllis, Bob Pillin
hesitated, then gave a nod.
Mr. Ventnor rose and extended his short legs before the fire.
"No, my boy," he said. "No!"
Unaccustomed to flat contradiction, Bob Pillin reddened.
"I'll bet you a tenner. Ask Scrivens."
Mr. Ventnor ejaculated:
"Scrivens---but they're not--" then, staring rather hard, he added: "I
won't bet. You may be right. Scrivens are your father's solicitors too,
aren't they? Always been sorry he didn't come to me. Shall we join the 
ladies?" And to the drawing-room he preceded a young man more
uncertain in his mind than on his feet....
Charles Ventnor was not one to let you see that more was going on within
than met the eye. But there was a good deal going on that evening, and
after his conversation with young Bob he had occasion more than once to
turn away and rub his hands together. When, after that second creditors'
meeting, he had walked down the stairway which led to the offices of
"The Island Navigation Company," he had been deep in thought. Short,
squarely built, rather stout, with moustache and large mutton-chop
whiskers of a red brown, and a faint floridity in face and dress, he
impressed at first sight only by a certain truly British vulgarity. One felt
that here was a hail-fellow--well-met man who liked lunch and dinner,
went to Scarborough for his summer holidays, sat on his wife, took his
daughters out in a boat and was never sick. One felt that he went to
church every Sunday morning, looked upwards as he moved through life,
disliked the unsuccessful, and expanded with his second glass of wine.
But then a clear look into his well-clothed face and red-brown eyes would
give the feeling: 'There's something fulvous here; he might be a bit too
foxy.' A third look brought the thought: 'He's certainly a bully.' He was
not a large creditor of old Heythorp. With interest on the original, he
calculated his claim at three hundred pounds--unredeemed shares in that
old Ecuador mine. But he had waited for his money eight years, and could
never imagine how it came about that he had been induced to wait so
long. There had been, of course, for one who liked "big pots," a certain
glamour about the personality of old Heythorp, still a bit of a swell in
shipping circles, and a bit of an aristocrat in Liverpool. But during the last
year Charles Ventnor had realised that the old chap's star had definitely
set--when that happens, of course, there is no more glamour, and the
time has come to get your money. Weakness in oneself and others is
despicable! Besides, he had food for thought, and descending the stairs
he chewed it: He smelt a rat--creatures for which both by nature and
profession he had a nose. Through Bob Pillin, on whom he sometimes
dwelt in connection with his younger daughter, he knew that old Pillin and
old Heythorp had been friends for thirty years and more. That, to an
astute mind, suggested something behind this sale. The thought had
already occurred to him when he read his copy of the report. A
commission would be a breach of trust, of course, but there were ways of 
doing things; the old chap was devilish hard pressed, and human nature
was human nature! His lawyerish mind habitually put two and two
together. The old fellow had deliberately appointed to meet his creditors
again just after the general meeting which would decide the purchase--
had said he might do something for them then. Had that no significance?
In these circumstances Charles Ventnor had come to the meeting with
eyes wide open and mouth tight closed. And he had watched. It was
certainly remarkable that such an old and feeble man, with no neck at all,
who looked indeed as if he might go off with apoplexy any moment,
should actually say that he "stood or fell" by this purchase, knowing that
if he fell he would be a beggar. Why should the old chap be so keen on
getting it through? It would do him personally no good, unless--Exactly!
He had left the meeting, therefore, secretly confident that old Heythorp
had got something out of this transaction which would enable him to
make a substantial proposal to his creditors. So that when the old man
had declared that he was going to make none, something had turned sour
in his heart, and he had said to himself: "All right, you old rascal! You
don't know C. V." The cavalier manner of that beggarly old rip, the defiant
look of his deep little eyes, had put a polish on the rancour of one who
prided himself on letting no man get the better of him. All that evening,
seated on one side of the fire, while Mrs. Ventnor sat on the other, and
the younger daughter played Gounod's Serenade on the violin--he
cogitated. And now and again he smiled, but not too much. He did not see
his way as yet, but had little doubt that before long he would. It would
not be hard to knock that chipped old idol off his perch. There was
already a healthy feeling among the shareholders that he was past work
and should be scrapped. The old chap should find that Charles V. was not
to be defied; that when he got his teeth into a thing, he did not let it go.
By hook or crook he would have the old man off his Boards, or his debt
out of him as the price of leaving him alone. His life or his money--and
the old fellow should determine which. With the memory of that defiance
fresh within him, he almost hoped it might come to be the first, and
turning to Mrs. Ventnor, he said abruptly:
"Have a little dinner Friday week, and ask young Pillin and the curate." He
specified the curate, a tee-totaller, because he had two daughters, and
males and females must be paired, but he intended to pack him off after 
dinner to the drawing-room to discuss parish matters while he and Bob
Pillin sat over their wine. What he expected to get out of the young man
he did not as yet know.
On the day of the dinner, before departing for the office, he had gone to
his cellar. Would three bottles of Perrier Jouet do the trick, or must he
add one of the old Madeira? He decided to be on the safe side. A bottle or
so of champagne went very little way with him personally, and young
Pillin might be another.
The Madeira having done its work by turning the conversation into such
an admirable channel, he had cut it short for fear young Pillin might drink
the lot or get wind of the rat. And when his guests were gone, and his
family had retired, he stood staring into the fire, putting together the
pieces of the puzzle. Five or six thousand pounds--six would be ten per
cent. on sixty! Exactly! Scrivens--young Pillin had said! But Crow &
Donkin, not Scriven & Coles, were old Heythorp's solicitors. What could
that mean, save that the old man wanted to cover the tracks of a secret
commission, and had handled the matter through solicitors who did not
know the state of his affairs! But why Pillin's solicitors? With this sale just
going through, it must look deuced fishy to them too. Was it all a mare's
nest, after all? In such circumstances he himself would have taken the
matter to a London firm who knew nothing of anybody. Puzzled,
therefore, and rather disheartened, feeling too that touch of liver which
was wont to follow his old Madeira, he went up to bed and woke his wife
to ask her why the dickens they couldn't always have soup like that!
Next day he continued to brood over his puzzle, and no fresh light came;
but having a matter on which his firm and Scrivens' were in touch, he
decided to go over in person, and see if he could surprise something out
of them. Feeling, from experience, that any really delicate matter would
only be entrusted to the most responsible member of the firm, he had
asked to see Scriven himself, and just as he had taken his hat to go, he
said casually:
"By the way, you do some business for old Mr. Heythorp, don't you?"
Scriven, raising his eyebrows a little, murmured: "Er--no," in exactly the
tone Mr. Ventnor himself used when he wished to imply that though he
didn't as a fact do business, he probably soon would. He knew therefore
that the answer was a true one. And non-plussed, he hazarded:
"Oh! I thought you did, in regard to a Mrs. Larne."
This time he had certainly drawn blood of sorts, for down came Scriven's
eyebrows, and he said:
"Mrs. Larne--we know a Mrs. Larne, but not in that connection. Why?"
"Oh! Young Pillin told me--"
"Young Pillin? Why, it's his---!" A little pause, and then: "Old Mr.
Heythorp's solicitors are Crow & Donkin, I believe."
Mr. Ventnor held out his hand. "Yes, yes," he said; "goodbye. Glad to
have got that matter settled up," and out he went, and down the street,
important, smiling. By George! He had got it! "It's his father"--Scriven
had been going to say. What a plant! Exactly! Oh! neat! Old Pillin had
made the settlement direct; and the solicitors were in the dark; that
disposed of his difficulty about them. No money had passed between old
Pillin and old Heythorp not a penny. Oh! neat! But not neat enough for
Charles Ventnor, who had that nose for rats. Then his smile died, and
with a little chill he perceived that it was all based on supposition--not
quite good enough to go on! What then? Somehow he must see this Mrs.
Larne, or better--old Pillin himself. The point to ascertain was whether she
had any connection of her own with Pillin. Clearly young Pillin didn't know
of it; for, according to him, old Heythorp had made the settlement. By
Jove! That old rascal was deep--all the more satisfaction in proving that
he was not as deep as C. V. To unmask the old cheat was already
beginning to seem in the nature of a public service. But on what pretext
could he visit Pillin? A subscription to the Windeatt almshouses! That
would make him talk in self-defence and he would take care not to press
the request to the actual point of getting a subscription. He caused
himself to be driven to the Pillin residence in Sefton Park. Ushered into a
room on the ground floor, heated in American fashion, Mr. Ventnor 
unbuttoned his coat. A man of sanguine constitution, he found this hothouse atmosphere a little trying. And having sympathetically obtained Joe
Pillin's reluctant refusal--Quite so! One could not indefinitely extend one's
subscriptions even for the best of causes!--he said gently:
"By the way, you know Mrs. Larne, don't you?"
The effect of that simple shot surpassed his highest hopes. Joe Pillin's
face, never highly coloured, turned a sort of grey; he opened his thin lips,
shut them quickly, as birds do, and something seemed to pass with
difficulty down his scraggy throat. The hollows, which nerve exhaustion
delves in the cheeks of men whose cheekbones are not high, increased
alarmingly. For a moment he looked deathly; then, moistening his lips, he
said:
"Larne--Larne? No, I don't seem---"
Mr. Ventnor, who had taken care to be drawing on his gloves, murmured:
"Oh! I thought--your son knows her; a relation of old Heythorp's," and he
looked up.
Joe Pillin had his handkerchief to his mouth; he coughed feebly, then with
more and more vigour:
"I'm in very poor health," he said, at last. "I'm getting abroad at once.
This cold's killing me. What name did you say?" And he remained with his
handkerchief against his teeth.
Mr. Ventnor repeated:
"Larne. Writes stories."
Joe Pillin muttered into his handkerchief
"Ali! H'm! No--I--no! My son knows all sorts of people. I shall have to try
Mentone. Are you going? Good-bye! Good-bye! I'm sorry; ah! ha! My 
cough--ah! ha h'h'm! Very distressing. Ye-hes! My cough-ah! ha h'h'm!
Most distressing. Ye-hes!"
Out in the drive Mr. Ventnor took a deep breath of the frosty air. Not
much doubt now! The two names had worked like charms. This weakly
old fellow would make a pretty witness, would simply crumple under
cross-examination. What a contrast to that hoary old sinner Heythorp,
whose brazenness nothing could affect. The rat was as large as life! And
the only point was how to make the best use of it. Then--for his
experience was wide--the possibility dawned on him, that after all, this
Mrs. Larne might only have been old Pillin's mistress--or be his natural
daughter, or have some other blackmailing hold on him. Any such
connection would account for his agitation, for his denying her, for his
son's ignorance. Only it wouldn't account for young Pillin's saying that old
Heythorp had made the settlement. He could only have got that from the
woman herself. Still, to make absolutely sure, he had better try and see
her. But how? It would never do to ask Bob Pillin for an introduction, after
this interview with his father. He would have to go on his own and chance
it. Wrote stories did she? Perhaps a newspaper would know her address;
or the Directory would give it--not a common name! And, hot on the
scent, he drove to a post office. Yes, there it was, right enough! "Larne,
Mrs. R., 23, Millicent Villas." And thinking to himself: 'No time like the
present,' he turned in that direction. The job was delicate. He must be
careful not to do anything which might compromise his power of making
public use of his knowledge. Yes-ticklish! What he did now must have a
proper legal bottom. Still, anyway you looked at it, he had a right to
investigate a fraud on himself as a shareholder of "The Island Navigation
Company," and a fraud on himself as a creditor of old Heythorp. Quite!
But suppose this Mrs. Larne was really entangled with old Pillin, and the
settlement a mere reward of virtue, easy or otherwise. Well! in that case
there'd be no secret commission to make public, and he needn't go
further. So that, in either event, he would be all right. Only--how to
introduce himself? He might pretend he was a newspaper man wanting a
story. No, that wouldn't do! He must not represent that he was what he
was not, in case he had afterwards to justify his actions publicly, always a
difficult thing, if you were not careful! At that moment there came into his
mind a question Bob Pillin had asked the other night. "By the way, you
can't borrow on a settlement, can you? Isn't there generally some clause 
against it?" Had this woman been trying to borrow from him on that
settlement? But at this moment he reached the house, and got out of his
cab still undecided as to how he was going to work the oracle.
Impudence, constitutional and professional, sustained him in saying to
the little maid:
"Mrs. Larne at home? Say Mr. Charles Ventnor, will you?"
His quick brown eyes took in the apparel of the passage which served for
hall--the deep blue paper on the walls, lilac-patterned curtains over the
doors, the well-known print of a nude young woman looking over her
shoulder, and he thought: 'H'm! Distinctly tasty!' They noted, too, a small
brown-and-white dog cowering in terror at the very end of the passage,
and he murmured affably: "Fluffy! Come here, Fluffy!" till Carmen's teeth
chattered in her head.
"Will you come in, sir?"
Mr. Ventnor ran his hand over his whiskers, and, entering a room, was
impressed at once by its air of domesticity. On a sofa a handsome woman
and a pretty young girl were surrounded by sewing apparatus and some
white material. The girl looked up, but the elder lady rose.
Mr. Ventnor said easily
"You know my young friend, Mr. Robert Pillin, I think."
The lady, whose bulk and bloom struck him to the point of admiration,
murmured in a full, sweet drawl:
"Oh! Ye-es. Are you from Messrs. Scrivens?"
With the swift reflection: 'As I thought!' Mr. Ventnor answered:
"Er--not exactly. I am a solicitor though; came just to ask about a certain
settlement that Mr. Pillin tells me you're entitled under."
"Phyllis dear!"
Seeing the girl about to rise from underneath the white stuff, Mr. Ventnor
said quickly:
"Pray don't disturb yourself--just a formality!" It had struck him at once
that the lady would have to speak the truth in the presence of this third
party, and he went on: "Quite recent, I think. This'll be your first intereston six thousand pounds? Is that right?" And at the limpid assent of that
rich, sweet voice, he thought: 'Fine woman; what eyes!'
"Thank you; that's quite enough. I can go to Scrivens for any detail. Nice
young fellow, Bob Pillin, isn't he?" He saw the girl's chin tilt, and Mrs.
Larne's full mouth curling in a smile.
"Delightful young man; we're very fond of him."
And he proceeded:
"I'm quite an old friend of his; have you known him long?"
"Oh! no. How long, Phyllis, since we met him at Guardy's? About a month.
But he's so unaffected--quite at home with us. A nice fellow."
Mr. Ventnor murmured:
"Very different from his father, isn't he?"
"Is he? We don't know his father; he's a shipowner, I think."
Mr. Ventnor rubbed his hands: "Ye-es," he said, "just giving up--a warm
man. Young Pillin's a lucky fellow--only son. So you met him at old Mr.
Heythorp's. I know him too--relation of yours, I believe."
"Our dear Guardy such a wonderful man."
Mr. Ventnor echoed: "Wonderful--regular old Roman."
"Oh! but he's so kind!" Mrs. Larne lifted the white stuff: "Look what he's
given this naughty gairl!"
Mr. Ventnor murmured: "Charming! Charming! Bob Pillin said, I think,
that Mr. Heythorp was your settlor."
One of those little clouds which visit the brows of women who have owed
money in their time passed swiftly athwart Mrs. Larne's eyes. For a
moment they seemed saying: 'Don't you want to know too much?' Then
they slid from under it.
"Won't you sit down?" she said. "You must forgive our being at work."
Mr. Ventnor, who had need of sorting his impressions, shook his head.
"Thank you; I must be getting on. Then Messrs. Scriven can--a mere
formality! Goodbye! Good-bye, Miss Larne. I'm sure the dress will be
most becoming."
And with memories of a too clear look from the girl's eyes, of a warm firm
pressure from the woman's hand, Mr. Ventnor backed towards the door
and passed away just in time to avoid hearing in two voices:
"What a nice lawyer!"
"What a horrid man!"
Back in his cab, he continued to rub his hands. No, she didn't know old
Pillin! That was certain; not from her words, but from her face. She
wanted to know him, or about him, anyway. She was trying to hook
young Bob for that sprig of a girl--it was clear as mud. H'm! it would
astonish his young friend to hear that he had called. Well, let it! And a
curious mixture of emotions beset Mr. Ventnor. He saw the whole thing
now so plainly, and really could not refrain from a certain admiration. The
law had been properly diddled! There was nothing to prevent a man from
settling money on a woman he had never seen; and so old Pillin's
settlement could probably not be upset. But old Heythorp could. It was
neat, though, oh! neat! And that was a fine woman--remarkably! He had 
a sort of feeling that if only the settlement had been in danger, it might
have been worth while to have made a bargain--a woman like that could
have made it worth while! And he believed her quite capable of
entertaining the proposition! Her eye! Pity--quite a pity! Mrs. Ventnor was
not a wife who satisfied every aspiration. But alas! the settlement was
safe. This baulking of the sentiment of love, whipped up, if anything, the
longing for justice in Mr. Ventnor. That old chap should feel his teeth now.
As a piece of investigation it was not so bad--not so bad at all! He had
had a bit of luck, of course,--no, not luck--just that knack of doing the
right thing at the right moment which marks a real genius for affairs.
But getting into his train to return to Mrs. Ventnor, he thought: 'A woman
like that would have been--!' And he sighed.
2
With a neatly written cheque for fifty pounds in his pocket Bob Pillin
turned in at 23, Millicent Villas on the afternoon after Mr. Ventnor's visit.
Chivalry had won the day. And he rang the bell with an elation which
astonished him, for he knew he was doing a soft thing.
"Mrs. Larne is out, sir; Miss Phyllis is at home."
His heart leaped.
"Oh-h! I'm sorry. I wonder if she'd see me?"
The little maid answered
"I think she's been washin' 'er'air, sir, but it may be dry be now. I'll see."
Bob Pillin stood stock still beneath the young woman on the wall. He could
scarcely breathe. If her hair were not dry--how awful! Suddenly he heard
floating down a clear but smothered "Oh! Gefoozleme!" and other words
which he could not catch. The little maid came running down.
"Miss Phyllis says, sir, she'll be with you in a jiffy. And I was to tell you
that Master Jock is loose, sir."
Bob Pillin answered "Tha-anks," and passed into the drawing-room. He
went to the bureau, took an envelope, enclosed the cheque, and
addressing it: "Mrs. Larne," replaced it in his pocket. Then he crossed
over to the mirror. Never till this last month had he really doubted his
own face; but now he wanted for it things he had never wanted. It had
too much flesh and colour. It did not reflect his passion. This was a
handicap. With a narrow white piping round his waistcoat opening, and a
buttonhole of tuberoses, he had tried to repair its deficiencies. But do
what he would, he was never easy about himself nowadays, never up to
that pitch which could make him confident in her presence. And until this
month to lack confidence had never been his wont. A clear, high, mocking
voice said:
"Oh-h! Conceited young man!"
And spinning round he saw Phyllis in the doorway. Her light brown hair
was fluffed out on her shoulders, so that he felt a kind of fainting-sweet
sensation, and murmured inarticulately:
"Oh! I say--how jolly!"
"Lawks! It's awful! Have you come to see mother?"
Balanced between fear and daring, conscious of a scent of hay and
verbena and camomile, Bob Pillin stammered:
"Ye-es. I--I'm glad she's not in, though."
Her laugh seemed to him terribly unfeeling.
"Oh! oh! Don't be foolish. Sit down. Isn't washing one's head awful?"
Bob Pillin answered feebly:
"Of course, I haven't much experience."
Her mouth opened.
"Oh! You are--aren't you?"
And he thought desperately: 'Dare I--oughtn't I--couldn't I somehow take
her hand or put my arm round her, or something?' Instead, he sat very
rigid at his end of the sofa, while she sat lax and lissom at the other, and
one of those crises of paralysis which beset would-be lovers fixed him to
the soul.
Sometimes during this last month memories of a past existence, when
chaff and even kisses came readily to the lips, and girls were fair game,
would make him think: 'Is she really such an innocent? Doesn't she really
want me to kiss her?' Alas! such intrusions lasted but a moment before a
blast of awe and chivalry withered them, and a strange and tragic
delicacy--like nothing he had ever known--resumed its sway. And
suddenly he heard her say:
"Why do you know such awful men?"
"What? I don't know any awful men."
"Oh yes, you do; one came here yesterday; he had whiskers, and he was
awful."
"Whiskers?" His soul revolted in disclaimer. "I believe I only know one
man with whiskers--a lawyer."
"Yes--that was him; a perfectly horrid man. Mother didn't mind him, but I
thought he was a beast."
"Ventnor! Came here? How d'you mean?"
"He did; about some business of yours, too." Her face had clouded over.
Bob Pillin had of late been harassed by the still-born beginning of a poem:
"I rode upon my way and saw
A maid who watched me from the door."
It never grew longer, and was prompted by the feeling that her face was
like an April day. The cloud which came on it now was like an April cloud,
as if a bright shower of rain must follow. Brushing aside the two
distressful lines, he said:
"Look here, Miss Larne--Phyllis--look here!"
"All right, I'm looking!"
"What does it mean--how did he come? What did he say?"
She shook her head, and her hair quivered; the scent of camomile,
verbena, hay was wafted; then looking at her lap, she muttered:
"I wish you wouldn't--I wish mother wouldn't--I hate it. Oh! Money!
Beastly--beastly!" and a tearful sigh shivered itself into Bob Pillin's
reddening ears.
"I say--don't! And do tell me, because--"
"Oh! you know."
"I don't--I don't know anything at all. I never---"
Phyllis looked up at him. "Don't tell fibs; you know mother's borrowing
money from you, and it's hateful!"
A desire to lie roundly, a sense of the cheque in his pocket, a feeling of
injustice, the emotion of pity, and a confused and black astonishment
about Ventnor, caused Bob Pillin to stammer:
"Well, I'm d---d!" and to miss the look which Phyllis gave him through her
lashes--a look saying:
"Ah! that's better!"
"I am d---d! Look here! D'you mean to say that Ventnor came here about
my lending money? I never said a word to him---"
"There you see--you are lending!"
He clutched his hair.
"We've got to have this out," he added.
"Not by the roots! Oh! you do look funny. I've never seen you with your
hair untidy. Oh! oh!"
Bob Pillin rose and paced the room. In the midst of his emotion he could
not help seeing himself sidelong in the mirror; and on pretext of holding
his head in both his hands, tried earnestly to restore his hair. Then
coming to a halt he said:
"Suppose I am lending money to your mother, what does it matter? It's
only till quarter-day. Anybody might want money."
Phyllis did not raise her face.
"Why are you lending it?"
"Because--because--why shouldn't I?" and diving suddenly, he seized her
hands.
She wrenched them free; and with the emotion of despair, Bob Pillin took
out the envelope.
"If you like," he said, "I'll tear this up. I don't want to lend it, if you don't
want me to; but I thought--I thought--" It was for her alone he had been
going to lend this money!
Phyllis murmured through her hair:
"Yes! You thought that I--that's what's so hateful!"
Apprehension pierced his mind.
"Oh! I never--I swear I never--"
"Yes, you did; you thought I wanted you to lend it."
She jumped up, and brushed past him into the window.
So she thought she was being used as a decoy! That was awful--
especially since it was true. He knew well enough that Mrs. Larne was
working his admiration for her daughter for all that it was worth. And he
said with simple fervour:
"What rot!" It produced no effect, and at his wits' end, he almost
shouted: "Look, Phyllis! If you don't want me to--here goes!" Phyllis
turned. Tearing the envelope across he threw the bits into the fire. "There
it is," he said.
Her eyes grew round; she said in an awed voice: "Oh!"
In a sort of agony of honesty he said:
"It was only a cheque. Now you've got your way."
Staring at the fire she answered slowly:
"I expect you'd better go before mother comes."
Bob Pillin's mouth fell afar; he secretly agreed, but the idea of sacrificing
a moment alone with her was intolerable, and he said hardily:
"No, I shall stick it!"
Phyllis sneezed.
"My hair isn't a bit dry," and she sat down on the fender with her back to
the fire.
A certain spirituality had come into Bob Pillin's face. If only he could get
that wheeze off: "Phyllis is my only joy!" or even: "Phyllis--do you--won't
you--mayn't I?" But nothing came--nothing.
And suddenly she said:
"Oh! don't breathe so loud; it's awful!"
"Breathe? I wasn't!"
"You were; just like Carmen when she's dreaming."
He had walked three steps towards the door, before he thought: 'What
does it matter? I can stand anything from her; and walked the three steps
back again.
She said softly:
"Poor young man!"
He answered gloomily:
"I suppose you realise that this may be the last time you'll see me?"
"Why? I thought you were going to take us to the theatre."
"I don't know whether your mother will--after---"
Phyllis gave a little clear laugh.
"You don't know mother. Nothing makes any difference to her."
And Bob Pillin muttered:
"I see." He did not, but it was of no consequence. Then the thought of
Ventnor again ousted all others. What on earth-how on earth! He
searched his mind for what he could possibly have said the other night. 
Surely he had not asked him to do anything; certainly not given him their
address. There was something very odd about it that had jolly well got to
be cleared up! And he said:
"Are you sure the name of that Johnny who came here yesterday was
Ventnor?"
Phyllis nodded.
"And he was short, and had whiskers?"
"Yes; red, and red eyes."
He murmured reluctantly:
"It must be him. Jolly good cheek; I simply can't understand. I shall go
and see him. How on earth did he know your address?"
"I expect you gave it him."
"I did not. I won't have you thinking me a squirt."
Phyllis jumped up. "Oh! Lawks! Here's mother!" Mrs. Larne was coming
up the garden. Bob Pillin made for the door. "Good-bye," he said; "I'm
going." But Mrs. Larne was already in the hall. Enveloping him in fur and
her rich personality, she drew him with her into the drawing-room, where
the back window was open and Phyllis gone.
"I hope," she said, "those naughty children have been making you
comfortable. That nice lawyer of yours came yesterday. He seemed quite
satisfied."
Very red above his collar, Bob Pillin stammered:
"I never told him to; he isn't my lawyer. I don't know what it means."
Mrs. Larne smiled. "My dear boy, it's all right. You needn't be so
squeamish. I want it to be quite on a business footing."
Restraining a fearful inclination to blurt out: "It's not going to be on any
footing!" Bob Pillin mumbled: "I must go; I'm late."
"And when will you be able---?"
"Oh! I'll--I'll send--I'll write. Good-bye!" And suddenly he found that Mrs.
Larne had him by the lapel of his coat. The scent of violets and fur was
overpowering, and the thought flashed through him: 'I believe she only
wanted to take money off old Joseph in the Bible. I can't leave my coat in
her hands! What shall I do?'
Mrs. Larne was murmuring:
"It would be so sweet of you if you could manage it today"; and her hand
slid over his chest. "Oh! You have brought your cheque-book--what a nice
boy!"
Bob Pillin took it out in desperation, and, sitting down at the bureau,
wrote a cheque similar to that which he had torn and burned. A warm kiss
lighted on his eyebrow, his head was pressed for a moment to a furry
bosom; a hand took the cheque; a voice said: "How delightful!" and a
sigh immersed him in a bath of perfume. Backing to the door, he gasped:
"Don't mention it; and--and don't tell Phyllis, please. Good-bye!"
Once through the garden gate, he thought: 'By gum! I've done it now.
That Phyllis should know about it at all! That beast Ventnor!'
His face grew almost grim. He would go and see what that meant
anyway!
3
Mr. Ventnor had not left his office when his young friend's card was
brought to him. Tempted for a moment to deny his own presence, he
thought: 'No! What's the good? Bound to see him some time!' If he had 
not exactly courage, he had that peculiar blend of self-confidence and
insensibility which must needs distinguish those who follow the law; nor
did he ever forget that he was in the right.
"Show him in!" he said.
He would be quite bland, but young Pillin might whistle for an
explanation; he was still tormented, too, by the memory of rich curves
and moving lips, and the possibilities of better acquaintanceship.
While shaking the young man's hand his quick and fulvous eye detected
at once the discomposure behind that mask of cheek and collar, and
relapsing into one of those swivel chairs which give one an advantage
over men more statically seated, he said:
"You look pretty bobbish. Anything I can do for you?"
Bob Pillin, in the fixed chair of the consultor, nursed his bowler on his
knee.
"Well, yes, there is. I've just been to see Mrs. Larne."
Mr. Ventnor did not flinch.
"Ah! Nice woman; pretty daughter, too!" And into those words he put a
certain meaning. He never waited to be bullied. Bob Pillin felt the pressure
of his blood increasing.
"Look here, Ventnor," he said, "I want an explanation."
"What of?"
"Why, of your going there, and using my name, and God knows what."
Mr. Ventnor gave his chair two little twiddles before he said
"Well, you won't get it."
Bob Pillin remained for a moment taken aback; then he muttered
resolutely:
"It's not the conduct of a gentleman."
Every man has his illusions, and no man likes them disturbed. The
gingery tint underlying Mr. Ventnor's colouring overlaid it; even the
whites of his eyes grew red.
"Oh!" he said; "indeed! You mind your own business, will you?"
"It is my business--very much so. You made use of my name, and I don't
choose---"
"The devil you don't! Now, I tell you what---"
Mr. Ventnor leaned forward--"you'd better hold your tongue, and not
exasperate me. I'm a good-tempered man, but I won't stand your
impudence."
Clenching his bowler hat, and only kept in his seat by that sense of
something behind, Bob Pillin ejaculated:
"Impudence! That's good--after what you did! Look here, why did you?
It's so extraordinary!"
Mr. Ventnor answered:
"Oh! is it? You wait a bit, my friend!"
Still more moved by the mystery of this affair, Bob Pillin could only
mutter:
"I never gave you their address; we were only talking about old
Heythorp."
And at the smile which spread between Mr. Ventnor's whiskers, he
jumped up, crying:
"It's not the thing, and you're not going to put me off. I insist on an
explanation."
Mr. Ventnor leaned back, crossing his stout legs, joining the tips of his
thick fingers. In this attitude he was always self-possessed.
"You do--do you?"
"Yes. You must have had some reason."
Mr. Ventnor gazed up at him.
"I'll give you a piece of advice, young cock, and charge you nothing for it,
too: Ask no questions, and you'll be told no lies. And here's another: Go
away before you forget yourself again."
The natural stolidity of Bob Pilings face was only just proof against this
speech. He said thickly:
"If you go there again and use my name, I'll Well, it's lucky for you you're
not my age. Anyway I'll relieve you of my acquaintanceship in future.
Good-evening!" and he went to the door. Mr. Ventnor had risen.
"Very well," he said loudly. "Good riddance! You wait and see which boot
the leg is on!"
But Bob Pillin was gone, leaving the lawyer with a very red face, a very
angry heart, and a vague sense of disorder in his speech. Not only Bob
Pillin, but his tender aspirations had all left him; he no longer dallied with
the memory of Mrs. Larne, but like a man and a Briton thought only of
how to get his own back, and punish evildoers. The atrocious words of his
young friend, "It's not the conduct of a gentleman," festered in the heart
of one who was made gentle not merely by nature but by Act of
Parliament, and he registered a solemn vow to wipe the insult out, if not
with blood, with verjuice. It was his duty, and they should d---d well see
him do it!
IV
Sylvanus Heythorp seldom went to bed before one or rose before eleven.
The latter habit alone kept his valet from handing in the resignation which
the former habit prompted almost every night.
Propped on his pillows in a crimson dressing-gown, and freshly shaved,
he looked more Roman than he ever did, except in his bath. Having
disposed of coffee, he was wont to read his letters, and The Morning Post,
for he had always been a Tory, and could not stomach paying a halfpenny
for his news. Not that there were many letters--when a man has reached
the age of eighty, who should write to him, except to ask for money?
It was Valentine's Day. Through his bedroom window he could see the
trees of the park, where the birds were in song, though he could not hear
them. He had never been interested in Nature--full-blooded men with
short necks seldom are.
This morning indeed there were two letters, and he opened that which
smelt of something. Inside was a thing like a Christmas card, save that
the naked babe had in his hands a bow and arrow, and words coming out
of his mouth: "To be your Valentine." There was also a little pink note
with one blue forget-me-not printed at the top. It ran:
"DEAREST GUARDY,--I'm sorry this is such a mangy little valentine; I
couldn't go out to get it because I've got a beastly cold, so I asked Jock,
and the pig bought this. The satin is simply scrumptious. If you don't
come and see me in it some time soon, I shall come and show it to you. I
wish I had a moustache, because my top lip feels just like a matchbox,
but it's rather ripping having breakfast in bed. Mr. Pillin's taking us to the
theatre the day after to-morrow evening. Isn't it nummy! I'm going to
have rum and honey for my cold.
"Good-bye,
"Your PHYLLIS." 
So this that quivered in his thick fingers, too insensitive to feel it, was a
valentine for him!
Forty years ago that young thing's grandmother had given him his last. It
made him out a very old chap! Forty years ago! Had that been himself
living then? And himself, who, as a youth came on the town in 'forty-five?
Not a thought, not a feeling the same! They said you changed your body
every seven years. The mind with it, too, perhaps! Well, he had come to
the last of his bodies, now! And that holy woman had been urging him to
take it to Bath, with her face as long as a tea-tray, and some gammon
from that doctor of his. Too full a habit--dock his port--no alcohol--might
go off in a coma any night! Knock off not he! Rather die any day than turn
tee-totaller! When a man had nothing left in life except his dinner, his
bottle, his cigar, and the dreams they gave him--these doctors forsooth
must want to cut them off! No, no! Carpe diem! while you lived, get
something out of it. And now that he had made all the provision he could
for those youngsters, his life was no good to any one but himself; and the
sooner he went off the better, if he ceased to enjoy what there was left,
or lost the power to say: "I'll do this and that, and you be jiggered!" Keep
a stiff lip until you crashed, and then go clean! He sounded the bell beside
him twice-for Molly, not his man. And when the girl came in, and stood,
pretty in her print frock, her fluffy over-fine dark hair escaping from under
her cap, he gazed at her in silence.
"Yes, sirr?"
"Want to look at you, that's all."
"Oh I an' I'm not tidy, sirr."
"Never mind. Had your valentine?"
"No, sirr; who would send me one, then?"
"Haven't you a young man?"
"Well, I might. But he's over in my country.
"What d'you think of this?"
He held out the little boy.
The girl took the card and scrutinised it reverently; she said in a detached
voice:
"Indeed, an' ut's pretty, too."
"Would you like it?"
"Oh I if 'tis not taking ut from you."
Old Heythorp shook his head, and pointed to the dressing-table.
"Over there--you'll find a sovereign. Little present for a good girl."
She uttered a deep sigh. "Oh! sirr, 'tis too much; 'tis kingly."
"Take it."
She took it, and came back, her hands clasping the sovereign and the
valentine, in an attitude as of prayer.
The old man's gaze rested on her with satisfaction.
"I like pretty faces--can't bear sour ones. Tell Meller to get my bath
ready."
When she had gone he took up the other letter--some lawyer's writing,
and opening it with the usual difficulty, read:
"February 13, 1905.
"SIR,--Certain facts having come to my knowledge, I deem it my duty to
call a special meeting of the shareholders of 'The Island Navigation Coy.,'
to consider circumstances in connection with the purchase of Mr. Joseph 
Pillin's fleet. And I give you notice that at this meeting your conduct will
be called in question.
"I am, Sir,
"Yours faithfully,
"CHARLES VENTNOR. "SYLVANUS HEYTHORP,ESQ."
Having read this missive, old Heythorp remained some minutes without
stirring. Ventnor! That solicitor chap who had made himself unpleasant at
the creditors' meetings!
There are men whom a really bad bit of news at once stampedes out of all
power of coherent thought and action, and men who at first simply do not
take it in. Old Heythorp took it in fast enough; coming from a lawyer it
was about as nasty as it could be. But, at once, with stoic wariness his old
brain began casting round. What did this fellow really know? And what
exactly could he do? One thing was certain; even if he knew everything,
he couldn't upset that settlement. The youngsters were all right. The old
man grasped the fact that only his own position was at stake. But this
was enough in all conscience; a name which had been before the public
fifty odd years--income, independence, more perhaps. It would take little,
seeing his age and feebleness, to make his Companies throw him over.
But what had the fellow got hold of? How decide whether or no to take
notice; to let him do his worst, or try and get into touch with him? And
what was the fellow's motive? He held ten shares! That would never make
a man take all this trouble, and over a purchase which was really firstrate business for the Company. Yes! His conscience was quite clean. He
had not betrayed his Company--on the contrary, had done it a good turn,
got them four sound ships at a low price--against much opposition. That
he might have done the Company a better turn, and got the ships at fiftyfour thousand, did not trouble him--the six thousand was a deuced sight
better employed; and he had not pocketed a penny piece himself! But the
fellow's motive? Spite? Looked like it. Spite, because he had been
disappointed of his money, and defied into the bargain! H'm! If that were
so, he might still be got to blow cold again. His eyes lighted on the pink 
note with the blue forget-me-not. It marked as it were the high water
mark of what was left to him of life; and this other letter in his hand-by
Jove! Low water mark! And with a deep and rumbling sigh he thought:
'No, I'm not going to be beaten by this fellow.'
"Your bath is ready, sir."
Crumpling the two letters into the pocket of his dressing-gown, he said:
"Help me up; and telephone to Mr. Farney to be good enough to come
round." ....
An hour later, when the secretary entered, his chairman was sitting by
the fire perusing the articles of association. And, waiting for him to look
up, watching the articles shaking in that thick, feeble hand, the secretary
had one of those moments of philosophy not too frequent with his kind.
Some said the only happy time of life was when you had no passions,
nothing to hope and live for. But did you really ever reach such a stage?
The old chairman, for instance, still had his passion for getting his own
way, still had his prestige, and set a lot of store by it! And he said:
"Good morning, sir; I hope you're all right in this east wind. The purchase
is completed."
"Best thing the company ever did. Have you heard from a shareholder
called Ventnor. You know the man I mean?"
"No, sir. I haven't."
"Well! You may get a letter that'll make you open your eyes. An impudent
scoundrel! Just write at my dictation."
"February 14th, 1905.
"CHARLES VENTNOR, Esq.
"SIR,--I have your letter of yesterday's date, the contents of which I am
at a loss to understand. My solicitors will be instructed to take the
necessary measures."
'Phew What's all this about?' the secretary thought.
"Yours truly...."
"I'll sign." And the shaky letters closed the page: "SYLVANUS HEYTHORP."
"Post that as you go."
"Anything else I can do for you, sir?"
"Nothing, except to let me know if you hear from this fellow."
When the secretary had gone the old man thought: 'So! The ruffian hasn't
called the meeting yet. That'll bring him round here fast enough if it's his
money he wants-blackmailing scoundrel!'
"Mr. Pillin, sir; and will you wait lunch, or will you have it in the diningroom?"
"In the dining-room."
At sight of that death's-head of a fellow, old Heythorp felt a sort of pity.
He looked bad enough already--and this news would make him look
worse. Joe Pillin glanced round at the two closed doors.
"How are you, Sylvanus? I'm very poorly." He came closer, and lowered
his voice: "Why did you get me to make that settlement? I must have
been mad. I've had a man called Ventnor--I didn't like his manner. He
asked me if I knew a Mrs. Larne."
"Ha! What did you say?"
"What could I say? I don't know her. But why did he ask?"
"Smells a rat."
Joe Pillin grasped the edge of the table with both hands.
"Oh!" he murmured. "Oh! don't say that!"
Old Heythorp held out to him the crumpled letter.
When he had read it Joe Pillin sat down abruptly before the fire.
"Pull yourself together, Joe; they can't touch you, and they can't upset
either the purchase or the settlement. They can upset me, that's all."
Joe Pillin answered, with trembling lips:
"How you can sit there, and look the same as ever! Are you sure they
can't touch me?"
Old Heyworth nodded grimly.
"They talk of an Act, but they haven't passed it yet. They might prove a
breach of trust against me. But I'll diddle them. Keep your pecker up, and
get off abroad."
"Yes, yes. I must. I'm very bad. I was going to-morrow. But I don't know,
I'm sure, with this hanging over me. My son knowing her makes it worse.
He picks up with everybody. He knows this man Ventnor too. And I
daren't say anything to Bob. What are you thinking of, Sylvanus? You look
very funny!"
Old Heythorp seemed to rouse himself from a sort of coma.
"I want my lunch," he said. "Will you stop and have some?"
Joe Pillin stammered out:
"Lunch! I don't know when I shall eat again. What are you going to do,
Sylvanus?"
"Bluff the beggar out of it."
"But suppose you can't?"
"Buy him off. He's one--of my creditors."
Joe Pillin stared at him afresh. "You always had such nerve," he said
yearningly. "Do you ever wake up between two and four? I do--and
everything's black."
"Put a good stiff nightcap on, my boy, before going to bed."
"Yes; I sometimes wish I was less temperate. But I couldn't stand it. I'm
told your doctor forbids you alcohol."
"He does. That's why I drink it."
Joe Pillin, brooding over the fire, said: "This meeting--d'you think they
mean to have it? D'you think this man really knows? If my name gets into
the newspapers--" but encountering his old friend's deep little eyes, he
stopped. "So you advise me to get off to-morrow, then?"
Old Heythorp nodded.
"Your lunch is served, sir."
Joe Pillin started violently, and rose.
"Well, good-bye, Sylvanus-good-bye! I don't suppose I shall be back till
the summer, if I ever come back!" He sank his voice: "I shall rely on you.
You won't let them, will you?"
Old Heythorp lifted his hand, and Joe Pillin put into that swollen shaking
paw his pale and spindly fingers. "I wish I had your pluck," he said sadly.
"Good-bye, Sylvanus," and turning, he passed out.
Old Heythorp thought: 'Poor shaky chap. All to pieces at the first shot!'
And, going to his lunch, ate more heavily than usual.
2
Mr. Ventnor, on reaching his office and opening his letters, found, as he
had anticipated, one from "that old rascal." Its contents excited in him the
need to know his own mind. Fortunately this was not complicated by a
sense of dignity--he only had to consider the position with an eye on not
being made to look a fool. The point was simply whether he set more
store by his money than by his desire for--er--Justice. If not, he had
merely to convene the special meeting, and lay before it the plain fact
that Mr. Joseph Pillin, selling his ships for sixty thousand pounds, had just
made a settlement of six thousand pounds on a lady whom he did not
know, a daughter, ward, or what-not--of the purchasing company's
chairman, who had said, moreover, at the general meeting, that he stood
or fell by the transaction; he had merely to do this, and demand that an
explanation be required from the old man of such a startling coincidence.
Convinced that no explanation would hold water, he felt sure that his
action would be at once followed by the collapse, if nothing more, of that
old image, and the infliction of a nasty slur on old Pillin and his hopeful
son. On the other hand, three hundred pounds was money; and, if old
Heythorp were to say to him: "What do you want to make this fuss for--
here's what I owe you!" could a man of business and the world let his
sense of justice--however he might itch to have it satisfied--stand in the
way of what was after all also his sense of Justice?--for this money had
been owing to him for the deuce of along time. In this dilemma, the
words:
"My solicitors will be instructed" were of notable service in helping him to
form a decision, for he had a certain dislike of other solicitors, and an
intimate knowledge of the law of libel and slander; if by any remote
chance there should be a slip between the cup and the lip, Charles
Ventnor might be in the soup--a position which he deprecated both by
nature and profession. High thinking, therefore, decided him at last to
answer thus:
"February 19th, 1905.
"SIR,--I have received your note. I think it may be fair, before taking
further steps in this matter, to ask you for a personal explanation of the
circumstances to which I alluded. I therefore propose with your
permission to call on you at your private residence at five o'clock tomorrow afternoon.
"Yours faithfully, "CHARLES VENTNOR.
"SYLVANUS HEYTHORP, Esq."
Having sent this missive, and arranged in his mind the damning, if
circumstantial, evidence he had accumulated, he awaited the hour with
confidence, for his nature was not lacking in the cock-surety of a Briton.
All the same, he dressed himself particularly well that morning, putting on
a blue and white striped waistcoat which, with a cream-coloured tie, set
off his fulvous whiskers and full blue eyes; and he lunched, if anything,
more fully than his wont, eating a stronger cheese and taking a glass of
special Club ale. He took care to be late, too, to show the old fellow that
his coming at all was in the nature of an act of grace. A strong scent of
hyacinths greeted him in the hall; and Mr. Ventnor, who was an amateur
of flowers, stopped to put his nose into a fine bloom and think
uncontrollably of Mrs. Larne. Pity! The things one had to give up in life--
fine women--one thing and another. Pity! The thought inspired in him a
timely anger; and he followed the servant, intending to stand no
nonsense from this paralytic old rascal.
The room he entered was lighted by a bright fire, and a single electric
lamp with an orange shade on a table covered by a black satin cloth.
There were heavily gleaming oil paintings on the walls, a heavy old brass
chandelier without candles, heavy dark red curtains, and an indefinable
scent of burnt acorns, coffee, cigars, and old man. He became conscious
of a candescent spot on the far side of the hearth, where the light fell on
old Heythorp's thick white hair.
"Mr. Ventnor, sir."
The candescent spot moved. A voice said: "Sit down."
Mr. Ventnor sat in an armchair on the opposite side of the fire; and,
finding a kind of somnolence creeping over him, pinched himself. He
wanted all his wits about him.
The old man was speaking in that extinct voice of his, and Mr. Ventnor
said rather pettishly:
"Beg pardon, I don't get you."
Old Heythorp's voice swelled with sudden force:
"Your letters are Greek to me."
"Oh! indeed, I think we can soon make them into plain English!"
"Sooner the better."
Mr. Ventnor passed through a moment of indecision. Should he lay his
cards on the table? It was not his habit, and the proceeding was
sometimes attended with risk. The knowledge, however, that he could
always take them up again, seeing there was no third person here to
testify that he had laid them down, decided him, and he said:
"Well, Mr. Heythorp, the long and short of the matter is this: Our friend
Mr. Pillin paid you a commission of ten per cent. on the sale of his ships.
Oh! yes. He settled the money, not on you, but on your relative Mrs.
Larne and her children. This, as you know, is a breach of trust on your
part."
The old man's voice: "Where did you get hold of that cock-and-bull
story?" brought him to his feet before the fire.
"It won't do, Mr. Heythorp. My witnesses are Mr. Pillin, Mrs. Larne, and
Mr. Scriven."
"What have you come here for, then--blackmail?"
Mr. Ventnor straightened his waistcoat; a rush of conscious virtue had
dyed his face.
"Oh! you take that tone," he said, "do you? You think you can ride
roughshod over everything? Well, you're very much mistaken. I advise
you to keep a civil tongue and consider your position, or I'll make a
beggar of you. I'm not sure this isn't a case for a prosecution!"
"Gammon!"
The choler in Charles Ventnor kept him silent for a moment; then he burst
out:
"Neither gammon nor spinach. You owe me three hundred pounds, you've
owed it me for years, and you have the impudence to take this attitude
with me, have you? Now, I never bluster; I say what I mean. You just
listen to me. Either you pay me what you owe me at once, or I call this
meeting and make what I know public. You'll very soon find out where
you are. And a good thing, too, for a more unscrupulous--unscrupulous---
" he paused for breath.
Occupied with his own emotion, he had not observed the change in old
Heythorp's face. The imperial on that lower lip was bristling, the crimson
of those cheeks had spread to the roots of his white hair. He grasped the
arms of his chair, trying to rise; his swollen hands trembled; a little saliva
escaped one corner of his lips. And the words came out as if shaken by
his teeth:
"So-so-you-you bully me!"
Conscious that the interview had suddenly passed from the phase of
negotiation, Mr. Ventnor looked hard at his opponent. He saw nothing but
a decrepit, passionate, crimson-faced old man at bay, and all the instincts
of one with everything on his side boiled up in him. The miserable old
turkey-cock--the apoplectic image! And he said:
"And you'll do no good for yourself by getting into a passion. At your age,
and in your condition, I recommend a little prudence. Now just take my
terms quietly, or you know what'll happen. I'm not to be intimidated by
any of your airs." And seeing that the old man's rage was such that he
simply could not speak, he took the opportunity of going on: "I don't care
two straws which you do--I'm out to show you who's master. If you think
in your dotage you can domineer any longer--well, you'll find two can play
at that game. Come, now, which are you going to do?"
The old man had sunk back in his chair, and only his little deep-blue eyes
seemed living. Then he moved one hand, and Mr. Ventnor saw that he
was fumbling to reach the button of an electric bell at the end of a cord.
'I'll show him,' he thought, and stepping forward, he put it out of reach.
Thus frustrated, the old man remained-motionless, staring up. The word
"blackmail" resumed its buzzing in Mr. Ventnor's ears. The impudence the
consummate impudence of it from this fraudulent old ruffian with one foot
in bankruptcy and one foot in the grave, if not in the dock.
"Yes," he said, "it's never too late to learn; and for once you've come up
against someone a leetle bit too much for you. Haven't you now? You'd
better cry 'Peccavi.'"
Then, in the deathly silence of the room, the moral force of his position,
and the collapse as it seemed of his opponent, awakening a faint
compunction, he took a turn over the Turkey carpet to readjust his mind.
"You're an old man, and I don't want to be too hard on you. I'm only
showing you that you can't play fast and loose as if you were God
Almighty any longer. You've had your own way too many years. And now
you can't have it, see!" Then, as the old man again moved forward in his
chair, he added: "Now, don't get into a passion again; calm yourself,
because I warn you--this is your last chance. I'm a man of my word; and
what I say, I do."
By a violent and unsuspected effort the old man jerked himself up and
reached the bell. Mr. Ventnor heard it ring, and said sharply:
"Mind you, it's nothing to me which you do. I came for your own good.
Please yourself. Well?"
He was answered by the click of the door and the old man's husky voice:
"Show this hound out! And then come back!"
Mr. Ventnor had presence of mind enough not to shake his fist. Muttering:
"Very well, Mr. Heythorp! Ah! Very well!" he moved with dignity to the
door. The careful shepherding of the servant renewed the fire of his
anger. Hound! He had been called a hound!
3
After seeing Mr. Ventnor off the premises the man Meller returned to his
master, whose face looked very odd--"all patchy-like," as he put it in the
servants' hall, as though the blood driven to his head had mottled for
good the snowy whiteness of the forehead. He received the unexpected
order:
"Get me a hot bath ready, and put some pine stuff in it."
When the old man was seated there, the valet asked:
"How long shall I give you, sir?"
"Twenty minutes."
"Very good, sir."
Lying in that steaming brown fragrant liquid, old Heythorp heaved a
stertorous sigh. By losing his temper with that ill-conditioned cur he had
cooked his goose. It was done to a turn; and he was a ruined man. If
only--oh! if only he could have seized the fellow by the neck and pitched
him out of the room! To have lived to be so spoken to; to have been
unable to lift hand or foot, hardly even his voice--he would sooner have
been dead! Yes--sooner have been dead! A dumb and measureless 
commotion was still at work in the recesses of that thick old body, silverbrown in the dark water, whose steam he drew deep into his wheezing
lungs, as though for spiritual relief. To be beaten by a cur like that! To
have that common cad of a pettifogging lawyer drag him down and kick
him about; tumble a name which had stood high, in the dust! The fellow
had the power to make him a byword and a beggar! It was incredible! But
it was a fact. And to-morrow he would begin to do it--perhaps had begun
already. His tree had come down with a crash! Eighty years-eighty good
years! He regretted none of them-regretted nothing; least of all this
breach of trust which had provided for his grandchildren--one of the best
things he had ever done. The fellow was a cowardly hound, too! The way
he had snatched the bell-pull out of his reach-despicable cur! And a chap
like that was to put "paid" to the account of Sylvanus Heythorp, to
"scratch" him out of life--so near the end of everything, the very end! His
hand raised above the surface fell back on his stomach through the dark
water, and a bubble or two rose. Not so fast--not so fast! He had but to
slip down a foot, let the water close over his head, and "Good-bye" to
Master Ventnor's triumph Dead men could not be kicked off the Boards of
Companies. Dead men could not be beggared, deprived of their
independence. He smiled and stirred a little in the bath till the water
reached the white hairs on his lower lip. It smelt nice! And he took a long
sniff: He had had a good life, a good life! And with the thought that he
had it in his power at any moment to put Master Ventnor's nose out of
joint--to beat the beggar after all, a sense of assuagement and well-being
crept over him. His blood ran more evenly again. He closed his eyes. They
talked about an after-life--people like that holy woman. Gammon! You
went to sleep--a long sleep; no dreams. A nap after dinner! Dinner! His
tongue sought his palate! Yes! he could eat a good dinner! That dog
hadn't put him off his stroke! The best dinner he had ever eaten was the
one he gave to Jack Herring, Chichester, Thornworthy, Nick Treffry and
Jolyon Forsyte at Pole's. Good Lord! In 'sixty--yes--'sixty-five? Just before
he fell in love with Alice Larne--ten years before he came to Liverpool.
That was a dinner! Cost twenty-four pounds for the six of them--and
Forsyte an absurdly moderate fellow. Only Nick Treff'ry and himself had
been three-bottle men! Dead! Every jack man of them. And suddenly he
thought: 'My name's a good one--I was never down before--never
beaten!'
A voice above the steam said:
"The twenty minutes is up, sir."
"All right; I'll get out. Evening clothes."
And Meller, taking out dress suit and shirt, thought: 'Now, what does the
old bloomer want dressin' up again for; why can't he go to bed and have
his dinner there? When a man's like a baby, the cradle's the place for
him.'....
An hour later, at the scene of his encounter with Mr. Ventnor, where the
table was already laid for dinner, old Heythorp stood and gazed. The
curtains had been drawn back, the window thrown open to air the room,
and he could see out there the shapes of the dark trees and a sky grapecoloured, in the mild, moist night. It smelt good. A sensuous feeling
stirred in him, warm from his bath, clothed from head to foot in fresh
garments. Deuce of a time since he had dined in full fig! He would have
liked a woman dining opposite--but not the holy woman; no, by George!--
would have liked to see light falling on a woman's shoulders once again,
and a pair of bright eyes! He crossed, snail-like, towards the fire. There
that bullying fellow had stood with his back to it--confound his
impudence!--as if the place belonged to him. And suddenly he had a
vision of his three secretaries' faces--especially young Farney's as they
would look, when the pack got him by the throat and pulled him down.
His co-directors, too! Old Heythorp! How are the mighty fallen! And that
hound jubilant!
His valet passed across the room to shut the window and draw the
curtains. This chap too! The day he could no longer pay his wages, and
had lost the power to say "Shan't want your services any more"--when he
could no longer even pay his doctor for doing his best to kill him off!
Power, interest, independence, all--gone! To be dressed and undressed,
given pap, like a baby in arms, served as they chose to serve him, and
wished out of the way--broken, dishonoured!
By money alone an old man had his being! Meat, drink, movement,
breath! When all his money was gone the holy woman would let him know 
it fast enough. They would all let him know it; or if they didn't, it would be
out of pity! He had never been pitied yet--thank God! And he said:
"Get me up a bottle of Perrier Jouet. What's the menu?"
"Germane soup, sir; filly de sole; sweetbread; cutlet soubees, rum
souffly."
"Tell her to give me a hors d'oeuvre, and put on a savoury."
"Yes, sir."
When the man had gone, he thought: 'I should have liked an oyster--too
late now!' and going over to his bureau, he fumblingly pulled out the top
drawer. There was little in it--Just a few papers, business papers on his
Companies, and a schedule of his debts; not even a copy of his will--he
had not made one, nothing to leave! Letters he had never kept. Half a
dozen bills, a few receipts, and the little pink note with the blue forgetme-not. That was the lot! An old tree gives up bearing leaves, and its
roots dry up, before it comes down in a wind; an old man's world slowly
falls away from him till he stands alone in the night. Looking at the pink
note, he thought: 'Suppose I'd married Alice--a man never had a better
mistress!' He fumbled the drawer to; but still he strayed feebly about the
room, with a curious shrinking from sitting down, legacy from the quarter
of an hour he had been compelled to sit while that hound worried at his
throat. He was opposite one of the pictures now. It gleamed, dark and
oily, limning a Scots Grey who had mounted a wounded Russian on his
horse, and was bringing him back prisoner from the Balaclava charge. A
very old friend--bought in 'fifty-nine. It had hung in his chambers in the
Albany--hung with him ever since. With whom would it hang when he was
gone? For that holy woman would scrap it, to a certainty, and stick up
some Crucifixion or other, some new-fangled high art thing! She could
even do that now if she liked--for she owned it, owned every mortal stick
in the room, to the very glass he would drink his champagne from; all
made over under the settlement fifteen years ago, before his last big
gamble went wrong. "De l'audace, toujours de l'audace!" The gamble
which had brought him down till his throat at last was at the mercy of a
bullying hound. The pitcher and the well! At the mercy---! The sound of a 
popping cork dragged him from reverie. He moved to his seat, back to the
window, and sat down to his dinner. By George! They had got him an
oyster! And he said:
"I've forgotten my teeth!"
While the man was gone for them, he swallowed the oysters, methodically
touching them one by one with cayenne, Chili vinegar, and lemon.
Ummm! Not quite what they used to be at Pimm's in the best days, but
not bad--not bad! Then seeing the little blue bowl lying before him, he
looked up and said:
"My compliments to cook on the oysters. Give me the champagne." And
he lifted his trembling teeth. Thank God, he could still put 'em in for
himself! The creaming goldenish fluid from the napkined bottle slowly
reached the brim of his glass, which had a hollow stem; raising it to his
lips, very red between the white hairs above and below, he drank with a
gurgling noise, and put the glass down-empty. Nectar! And just cold
enough!
"I frapped it the least bit, sir."
"Quite right. What's that smell of flowers?"
"It's from those 'yacinths on the sideboard, sir. They come from Mrs.
Larne, this afternoon."
"Put 'em on the table. Where's my daughter?"
"She's had dinner, sir; goin' to a ball, I think."
"A ball!"
"Charity ball, I fancy, sir."
"Ummm! Give me a touch of the old sherry with the soup."
"Yes, sir. I shall have to open a bottle:"
"Very well, then, do!"
On his way to the cellar the man confided to Molly, who was carrying the
soup:
"The Gov'nor's going it to-night! What he'll be like tomorrow I dunno."
The girl answered softly:
"Poor old man, let um have his pleasure." And, in the hall, with the soup
tureen against her bosom, she hummed above the steam, and thought of
the ribbons on her new chemises, bought out of the sovereign he had
given her.
And old Heythorp, digesting his osyters, snuffed the scent of the
hyacinths, and thought of the St. Germain, his favourite soup. It would n't
be first-rate, at this time of year--should be made with little young homegrown peas. Paris was the place for it. Ah! The French were the fellows for
eating, and--looking things in the face! Not hypocrites--not ashamed of
their reason or their senses!
The soup came in. He sipped it, bending forward as far as he could, his
napkin tucked in over his shirt-front like a bib. He got the bouquet of that
sherry to a T--his sense of smell was very keen to-night; rare old stuff it
was--more than a year since he had tasted it--but no one drank sherry
nowadays, hadn't the constitution for it! The fish came up, and went
down; and with the sweetbread he took his second glass of champagne.
Always the best, that second glass--the stomach well warmed, and the
palate not yet dulled. Umm! So that fellow thought he had him beaten,
did he? And he said suddenly:
"The fur coat in the wardrobe, I've no use for it. You can take it away tonight."
With tempered gratitude the valet answered:
"Thank you, sir; much obliged, I'm sure." So the old buffer had found out
there was moth in it!
"Have I worried you much?"
"No, sir; not at all, sir--that is, no more than reason."
"Afraid I have. Very sorry--can't help it. You'll find that, when you get like
me."
"Yes, sir; I've always admired your pluck, sir.
"Um! Very good of you to say so."
"Always think of you keepin' the flag flying', sir."
Old Heythorp bent his body from the waist.
"Much obliged to you."
"Not at all, sir. Cook's done a little spinach in cream with the soubees."
"Ah! Tell her from me it's a capital dinner, so far."
"Thank you, sir."
Alone again, old Heythorp sat unmoving, his brain just narcotically
touched. "The flag flyin'--the flag flyin'!" He raised his glass and sucked.
He had an appetite now, and finished the three cutlets, and all the sauce
and spinach. Pity! he could have managed a snipe fresh shot! A desire to
delay, to lengthen dinner, was strong upon him; there were but the
souffle' and the savoury to come. He would have enjoyed, too, someone
to talk to. He had always been fond of good company--been good
company himself, or so they said--not that he had had a chance of late.
Even at the Boards they avoided talking to him, he had noticed for a long
time. Well! that wouldn't trouble him again--he had sat through his last
Board, no doubt. They shouldn't kick him off, though; he wouldn't give
them that pleasure--had seen the beggars hankering after his chairman's 
shoes too long. The souffle was before him now, and lifting his glass, he
said:
"Fill up."
"These are the special glasses, sir; only four to the bottle."
"Fill up."
The servant filled, screwing up his mouth.
Old Heythorp drank, and put the glass down empty with a sigh. He had
been faithful to his principles, finished the bottle before touching the
sweet--a good bottle--of a good brand! And now for the souffle! Delicious,
flipped down with the old sherry! So that holy woman was going to a ball,
was she! How deuced funny! Who would dance with a dry stick like that,
all eaten up with a piety which was just sexual disappointment? Ah! yes,
lots of women like that--had often noticed 'em--pitied 'em too, until you
had to do with them and they made you as unhappy as themselves, and
were tyrants into the bargain. And he asked:
"What's the savoury?"
"Cheese remmykin, sir."
His favourite.
"I'll have my port with it--the 'sixty-eight." The man stood gazing with
evident stupefaction. He had not expected this. The old man's face was
very flushed, but that might be the bath. He said feebly:
"Are you sure you ought, sir?"
"No, but I'm going to."
"Would you mind if I spoke to Miss Heythorp, Sir?"
"If you do, you can leave my service."
"Well, Sir, I don't accept the responsibility."
"Who asked you to?"
"No, Sir...."
"Well, get it, then; and don't be an ass."
"Yes, Sir." If the old man were not humoured he would have a fit,
perhaps!
And the old man sat quietly staring at the hyacinths. He felt happy, his
whole being lined and warmed and drowsed--and there was more to
come! What had the holy folk to give you compared with the comfort of a
good dinner? Could they make you dream, and see life rosy for a little?
No, they could only give you promissory notes which never would be
cashed. A man had nothing but his pluck--they only tried to undermine it,
and make him squeal for help. He could see his precious doctor throwing
up his hands: "Port after a bottle of champagne--you'll die of it!" And a
very good death too--none better. A sound broke the silence of the
closed-up room. Music? His daughter playing the piano overhead. Singing
too! What a trickle of a voice! Jenny Lind! The Swedish nightingale--he
had never missed the nights when she was singing--Jenny Lind!
"It's very hot, sir. Shall I take it out of the case?"
Ah! The ramequin!
"Touch of butter, and the cayenne!"
"Yes, sir."
He ate it slowly, savouring each mouthful; had never tasted a better. With
cheese--port! He drank one glass, and said:
"Help me to my chair."
And settled there before the fire with decanter and glass and hand-bell on
the little low table by his side, he murmured:
"Bring coffee, and my cigar, in twenty minutes."
To-night he would do justice to his wine, not smoking till he had finished.
As old Horace said:
"Aequam memento rebus in arduis Servare mentem."
And, raising his glass, he sipped slowly, spilling a drop or two, shutting
his eyes.
The faint silvery squealing of the holy woman in the room above, the
scent of hyacinths, the drowse of the fire, on which a cedar log had just
been laid, the feeling of the port soaking down into the crannies of his
being, made up a momentary Paradise. Then the music stopped; and no
sound rose but the tiny groans of the log trying to resist the fire. Dreamily
he thought: 'Life wears you out--wears you out. Logs on a fire!' And he
filled his glass again. That fellow had been careless; there were dregs at
the bottom of the decanter and he had got down to them! Then, as the
last drop from his tilted glass trickled into the white hairs on his chin, he
heard the coffee tray put down, and taking his cigar he put it to his ear,
rolling it in his thick fingers. In prime condition! And drawing a first whiff,
he said:
"Open that bottle of the old brandy in the sideboard."
"Brandy, sir? I really daren't, sir."
"Are you my servant or not?"
"Yes, sir, but---"
A minute of silence, then the man went hastily to the sideboard, took out
the bottle, and drew the cork. The tide of crimson in the old man's face
had frightened him.
"Leave it there."
The unfortunate valet placed the bottle on the little table. 'I'll have to tell
her,' he thought; 'but if I take away the port decanter and the glass, it
won't look so bad.' And, carrying them, he left the room.
Slowly the old man drank his coffee, and the liqueur of brandy. The whole
gamut! And watching his cigar-smoke wreathing blue in the orange glow,
he smiled. The last night to call his soul his own, the last night of his
independence. Send in his resignations to-morrow--not wait to be kicked
off! Not give that fellow a chance!
A voice which seemed to come from far off, said:
"Father! You're drinking brandy! How can you--you know it's simple
poison to you!" A figure in white, scarcely actual, loomed up close. He
took the bottle to fill up his liqueur glass, in defiance; but a hand in a long
white glove, with another dangling from its wrist, pulled it away, shook it
at him, and replaced it in the sideboard. And, just as when Mr. Ventnor
stood there accusing him, a swelling and churning in his throat prevented
him from speech; his lips moved, but only a little froth came forth.
His daughter had approached again. She stood quite close, in white satin,
thin-faced, sallow, with eyebrows raised, and her dark hair frizzed--yes!
frizzed--the holy woman! With all his might he tried to say: 'So you bully
me, do you--you bully me to-night!' but only the word "so" and a sort of
whispering came forth. He heard her speaking. "It's no good your getting
angry, Father. After champagne--it's wicked!" Then her form receded in a
sort of rustling white mist; she was gone; and he heard the sputtering
and growling of her taxi, bearing her to the ball. So! She tyrannised and
bullied, even before she had him at her mercy, did she? She should see!
Anger had brightened his eyes; the room came clear again. And slowly
raising himself he sounded the bell twice, for the girl, not for that fellow
Meller, who was in the plot. As soon as her pretty black and whiteaproned figure stood before him, he said:
"Help me up."
Twice her soft pulling was not enough, and he sank back. The third time
he struggled to his feet.
"Thank you; that'll do." Then, waiting till she was gone, he crossed the
room, fumbled open the sideboard door, and took out the bottle.
Reaching over the polished oak, he grasped a sherry glass; and holding
the bottle with both hands, tipped the liquor into it, put it to his lips and
sucked. Drop by drop it passed over his palate mild, very old, old as
himself, coloured like sunlight, fragrant. To the last drop he drank it, then
hugging the bottle to his shirt-front, he moved snail-like to his chair, and
fell back into its depths. For some minutes he remained there motionless,
the bottle clasped to his chest, thinking: 'This is not the attitude of a
gentleman. I must put it down on the table-on the table;' but a thick
cloud was between him and everything. It was with his hands he would
have to put the bottle on the table! But he could not find his hands, could
not feel them. His mind see-sawed in strophe and antistrophe: "You can't
move!"--"I will move!" "You're beaten"--"I'm not beat." "Give up"--"I
won't." That struggle to find his hands seemed to last for ever--he must
find them! After that--go down--all standing--after that! Everything round
him was red. Then the red cloud cleared just a little, and he could hear
the clock--"tick-tick-tick"; a faint sensation spread from his shoulders
down to his wrists, down his palms; and yes--he could feel the bottle! He
redoubled his struggle to get forward in his chair; to get forward and put
the bottle down. It was not dignified like this! One arm he could move
now; but he could not grip the bottle nearly tight enough to put it down.
Working his whole body forward, inch by inch, he shifted himself up in the
chair till he could lean sideways, and the bottle, slipping down his chest,
dropped slanting to the edge of the low stool-table. Then with all his
might he screwed his trunk and arms an inch further, and the bottle
stood. He had done it--done it! His lips twitched into a smile; his body
sagged back to its old position. He had done it! And he closed his eyes ....
At half-past eleven the girl Molly, opening the door, looked at him and
said softly: "Sirr! there's some ladies, and a gentleman!" But he did not
answer. And, still holding the door, she whispered out into the hall:
"He's asleep, miss."
A voice whispered back:
"Oh! Just let me go in, I won't wake him unless he does. But I do want to
show him my dress."
The girl moved aside; and on tiptoe Phyllis passed in. She walked to
where, between the lamp-glow and the fire-glow, she was lighted up.
White satin--her first low-cut dress--the flush of her first supper party--a
gardenia at her breast, another in her fingers! Oh! what a pity he was
asleep! How red he looked! How funnily old men breathed! And
mysteriously, as a child might, she whispered:
"Guardy!"
No answer! And pouting, she stood twiddling the gardenia. Then suddenly
she thought: 'I'll put it in his buttonhole! When he wakes up and sees it,
how he'll jump!'
And stealing close, she bent and slipped it in. Two faces looked at her
from round the door; she heard Bob Pillin's smothered chuckle; her
mother's rich and feathery laugh. Oh! How red his forehead was! She
touched it with her lips; skipped back, twirled round, danced silently a
second, blew a kiss, and like quicksilver was gone.
And the whispering, the chuckling, and one little out-pealing laugh rose in
the hall.
But the old man slept. Nor until Meller came at his usual hour of half-past
twelve, was it known that he would never wake.